Título: Platonic Space discussion 3
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E6_XdPm9fa8
Duración: 104.4 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Panel discussion 3

Welcome everybody. Uh we're we're open for another um discussion of the platonic space. If anybody has any issues or questions for each other, please now's the time.

>> I've got questions or comments. I don't want to monopolize thing. Go for it.

>> Go for it. [clears throat] >> So, uh when I prepared um my talk, I had not read what you wrote, uh Mike, because I wanted to just come at this.

Okay. What's the biology unbiased? What is it telling me? I've since gone back and read these things. And my impression with regard to the the Plato concept is that unless there's a proposal for where this these forms are stored and what the mechanisms are for pointing and ingressing you know how you consult these forms then the whole project is kind of indistinguishable from well mathematics, physics and biology all have patterns and rules and why there are any rules and how they get consulted we don't know and so I was wondering whether the intent of this whole session this series of lectures was to see if somebody could come up with gee what is a storage site and what are mechanisms for pointing and ingressing um my impression is that at least a number of the talks certainly mine and Cordanas are that well okay you don't really not need to have forms outside somewhere that are being consulted. Um you can have them just as rules and constraints within say the biological organism itself. Um or as my quantum mechanics professor used to joke, yeah, it took you a little while to do the homework, but every electron and proton is doing in the whole universe is doing it like that all the time. Um, and so has there been any insight into whether there is consulting or whether it really just comes back to okay, there are laws somewhere and we just need to find them out.

>> Well, I would say there's a couple of things. [clears throat] Uh I I I did first of all I I didn't think that these these these other talks would address that question in particular because fundamentally there are I I think there are many people who don't who don't agree with with my framing of it in the first place. And so that's that step one is to even say whether this is this this whole thing is even that like I'm I'm I'm arguing for a strong interactionist model and uh before you can worry about the interaction you have to think that there is interaction right and some people some people don't so however uh what I would what I would focus on and what our research program actually focuses on is trying to understand what is it that you actually get during this interaction. So for example uh is it just a is it are they are they just constraints are they enablements and and lots of people say well it's not just constraints it's also enablements but I think enablements are actually you can take them much more seriously that is not just that by closing off some stuff over here I sort of forced you into this other uh set of things that you're going to do but in in the sense of in the sense of free lunches meaning that or heavily discounted lunches in that you get more than you put So I'm really interested in this idea that uh what you get out of such a thing. So by bu by putting in some amount of effort to make some kind of interface what you actually get through it is in some way uh in some quantifiable way more than you put in.

In other words, what you get are not simply constraints on things that you can't do nor being sort of shuttled into other other modes but actually you get policies maybe information. So static patterns, policies, maybe actual compute, you know, in the form of virtual machines, you get you get something that you didn't pay for in an important sense because I think when we the current way of calculating what is it that you paid for only takes into account this this side of the interaction and my my strong supposition and my hypothesis is that actually you get what you get way more than you paid for. And I think biology in particular, I think the things we call biology tend to be systems that exploit the hell out of that. That basically they are very good at exploiting these things, saving effort, the things that they did not need to evolve or or find or search for or anything like that. Um, so in bi but now now in biology it's very hard to quantify that because it's always complex. There always mechanisms you don't know. So it's it's really hard to prove any of that. But in simpler systems and in simple uh computational systems for example maybe we can and that's one of the things that we're doing is is actually trying to uh quantify um how much you put in and what you got out in these in these simple systems. So since you put it that way I'll mention something that I didn't put in my talk but it is in the causality paper from a couple years ago which is uh Richard Leven's idea from across town from you. is he was at um Harvard School of Public Health and the idea uh and this goes all the way back to Wington's theoretical biology books in the 70s.

There's a couple nice papers back then and that is that um essentially the way you get some structure is by crystallizing out of an amorphous mass. In other words, what happens is biology starts off it's not that you build new things. It's just that you start off doing many many things badly and by adding constraints now you exclude many of those things and now the remaining ones are done well and you can see this for example in neurobiology where in lower animals there'll be a brain nucleus that does two or three things connecting to two or three places and in higher uh organisms it splits into two uh each one of which takes on one of those tasks or in in the genome um in E.coli you know the whole genome's accessible in in ukariots you suppress everything with histones and now you selectively derress stuff and so um so what you've done then is essentially increase the signal to noise ratio of stuff you already had. Oh enzymes are another classic. So yeah, all these chemical reactions can go on without the enzyme, but 12 other side reactions also happen.

If you have an enzyme now, um you're essentially preventing some of those by this nature of the active site and only a couple of them happen and they happen much faster and much better. And so this signal to noise ratio which is kind of what you're talking about, you know, about the ratio of like inputs to outputs is probably exactly the thing to be looking at.

>> Yeah, I think that's I think that's certainly one one subset of those of those phenomena. um you know in biology even though even though it's much harder to prove anything and in this scenario and and hard to quantify these things uh we do now with the with the some of the synthetic models that that we that we and others have made. So xenobots, anthropots, this kind of thing there's a there's a there's an opportunity and a challenge now to for for for biologists to be able to say when was the computational cost paid to to design these things. In other words, we know when the frog and the human design was paid for, it was in the millions of years of selection for specific features. But when you create something that's never been here before and it has certain competencies, you want to know where did those come from and when did we pay for them and I don't think it's good enough. So, so when I ask people this question, they they generally say, well, it has an evolutionary history. It just sort of learned to do that when it was being selected for other stuff. And that's okay except A, it provides zero explanatory value. It just means that whatever other weird thing pops up, you'll just sort of chalk it up to to the history. And B, it rips up a large part of what I thought evolutionary theory was supposed to do, which is provide a tight specificity between a history of environments and the properties that you got out the other end. you know, you're supposed to be able to say this thing looks and acts this way because it has a history of selection going back and everything else died out and that's why, you know, so so if you're [clears throat] willing to rip that up and just say, well, whatever your history was, you can end up with pretty much anything, okay, but that, you know, I I think we're supposed to do better than that. I think we're supposed to have some kind of some kind of theory to be able to say uh more than just the developmental plasticity. we're able to say, okay, why is it that we selected for all of these things? And also, by the way, in a novel configuration, all of this other new stuff works that's never that's never been evaluated before. So, at least, you know, hard to quantify, but at least we can start looking for theory that that does better than math. It's emergent, you know, it just sort of showed up, right?

>> So, I thought that was the Evo DVO program. Or maybe it's only because I only talk to people like Gunter Vagner who think that okay that uh environment is not the whole story.

There is a set of rules somewhere.

There's some additional piece that's missing to explain that it's not all random and selection.

There's some other set of constraints on how you build an organism that functions >> the constraints right. So, so I I think this is more than constraints and Andreas I don't know Gunther but Andreas Vagner gets gets really close to this he doesn't quite quite come out saying but um like he has this book uh arrival of the fittest right which I think asks exactly this question like okay you can sort of select out the bad stuff that's great where does the good stuff come from and specifically constraints are one thing but when you get uh when you get significant competencies out of it you have to it's It's it's more maybe I mean this is you know to be [clears throat] decided but but maybe it's more than constraints maybe you're actually by building certain interfaces >> you're tapping into uh something that provides a bigger return on investment right and then I could I mean I could think of a number of a number of examples of that so [clears throat] I think I think learning to predict and uh pre predict it uh facilitate it when we want it suppress it when we don't want it because there are scenarios where that stuff happens right everybody knows You get complexity like that. You get unpredictability. Maybe you get perverse instantiation in a life context. But it's not just that. It's not just complexity and unpredictability. It's it's competencies that would be recognizable to any behavior scientist.

And that some somewhere along the along the you know the the spectrum right of maybe maybe low maybe maybe higher that that I think uh takes takes uh that that requires explanation because if you if you don't have uh a a long history of selection for it and you don't have direct engineering or design for it we're looking at something additional to that that's that's what I think we have to you know there's knowledge gaps around how where that stuff comes Not that I have the answer. I'm I'm just simply asking do we really need the environment for that meaning symbiotic relationship between two species can I think can explain that kind of um creating noise in one species which the other species will use that noise in different way. So species A for it it's noise but for species B that's food by increasing that it you actually increasing the other and the fitness function is not only on fe on group A it's actually on group B that influence group A. So you're creating a symbiotic connection that really really complicate the way to describe what is good and not what is not good.

>> Well, what you need for that? So the question is where's the directionality coming from? So basically you're saying, okay, I need a rectifier. Here's somebody else. Here's somebody who's making noise. Here's somebody else who can use that noise and put direction on it, which is exactly a carnau heat engine. um you've got random motions and you now put it in a piston and you can now direct it into a higher level of work which is a macroscopic thing. And so it seems to me that what biology needs to have done then is have invented some little module that is a rectifier and um could take noise of whatever kinds and make something useful out of it.

And um I had wondered whether a couple of the theorems that showed up in these talks might be clues as to okay how do you design such a thing? You know what would it look like? How would nature have designed it? And the two things that struck me were one uh in that uh in the platonic uh you know that Hu Chung Wang is solola paper um basically have this theorem about um if you have vector embeddings let's see I wrote it down let's see see if I can get it right um So um you want a vector embedding in which the similarity between the observation and the constructs you're trying to make is the same as pointwise mutual information. I don't understand that but I get the flavor of it and it seems like the sort of computation or kind of constraint or requirement that might tell you okay what is the kind of thing you have to build that will is guaranteed to make useful stuff and then uh selection can go figure out which useful stuff. So, it's like Lego blocks, you know, you're always going to make something because the way they go together. The other one was this thing that came up. Um the um the Marov blanket theorem, which sounds like it goes back to Ross Ashby's thing about um if you're going to have a regulator, it has to have a model of what's being regulated. Um and I looked into the literature. So I was familiar with Ashby but I looked into the literature and I see that there's debates about whether he ever actually proved that and uh you know has there subsequently been a proof of that but that would be another kind of thing that would be you could imagine being a requirement for making mod biological modules that are very likely to make useful stuff and all you have to do is recombine them or combine them or whatever.

So to comment about the pointwise mutual information part, I want to add that I think the paper we had in the appendix and some discussion on this notion that the kernel itself the relationships between embeddings map to point wise mutual information of like two events in probability space. So like P of I guess well point mutual inteation is like a a ratio of log probabilities but like the idea being that like the kernels are becoming the reflection of the mutual information shared between those two objects that are embedded.

This assumes there's a lot of mathematical assumptions here. So it's not an ideal like proof. It assumes like bjectivity and other things that are not necessarily uh practical I would say. But that was the kind of thing we were getting at the kernel meaning that the inner pot embeddings then their relationships are converging or creating something that is equivalent to pointwise mutual information given some mathematical assumptions >> and but that's selecting out a special kind of object right >> yeah so the embedding is not necessarily all possible objects or anything that it's like a it's like whatever the model chose to compress its representation towards >> [clears throat] >> So, um, yeah. So, I have a few thoughts, but they're probably useless and I shouldn't take up time, but is there a, um, an idiot's version, well, not an idiot, but, you know, say a biopysicist version of the mathematics of that that one could weigh through and maybe understand in detail how it all plays out.

>> [snorts] >> In other words, for those of us who don't think about embeddings all day.

>> Oh, that's yes. Unfortunately, I don't know about biohysics because I I guess I'm on the other side. I think about embeddings all day.

>> But [clears throat] I think if there are concepts of like notions of like co-occurrence and the probability of co-occurrence that's kind of what point information is kind of reflecting that is what a kernel is.

It's like saying that these embeddings have to be embedded close together because they co-occur frequently together. So like the notion that you know in language you know like I guess we can science that you know words are their meaning derives from the company they keep. It's like objects meanings derive from you know the things that co-occur often together. [clears throat] >> Okay.

Um okay I'll incubate on that some more.

Thank you. Yep.

Yeah, nobody else wants to jump in. I I'll have a I can keep throwing in >> jump in.

>> So, one thing >> I'm wondering Oh, >> okay. Yeah, go ahead.

>> Okay. I'm wondering like whether we have a better sense of which mathematical objects have free lunches. I feel like attractors might have them, right? Like if we're doing any sort of difference, the sorting algorithms paper has like we have uh kind of a transitive global objective and we can see the algorithm like getting to some sort of subobjective. I'm wondering if we have like yeah set of objects that we know are like potent.

>> So so we've been we've been playing with this uh taking different ones and uh trying to see what they offer. Uh, so there will be some some work on this coming soon. The the the difficulty with with all of that is that it's a two-way IQ test, right? Like as always, when you're trying to gauge what that is, it's only as good as we know how to notice it. So like like the clustering thing, the only reason you know we found it is because I thought to look for it, but there's probably a thousand other things that we just haven't thought to look for, right? So, so [clears throat] we are still very much both for the biological, so for cells, tissues, gene regulatory networks, blah, blah, blah.

We are looking for suites of tools to identify novel competencies that um that we haven't found yet. And ideally, uh I mean there's no such thing as unbiased I guess, but ideally as differently biased as what the humans have been looking for all these years, right? So, the same thing is here. I mean I I I would like to deploy the exact same tools on all of this stuff so that uh we could try to find as many competencies as we can in different spaces but I think we are limited by our imagination primarily right in being able to do that.

>> Yeah. Yeah. And I suppose my other question is like a free lunch like I think it's it's really clear to me what a free lunch is at a very low level. Um, you know, like an attractor feels like a free lunch.

Like I'm I'm within the basin now. I know where I'm going, right? Um, but as a human, like when I think about a free lunch, I just think of doing something that costs me less to get more, right?

That's it's not really a free lunch, but it's like a a place where where we're not dealing with a zero sum. So, I guess what I'm wondering is, you know, what's the difference there, >> right? I I don't I don't mean literally free because it's it's you still have to build the interface so it's not going to be free but but I mean you know some sort of heavily heavily discounted lunch so to speak right so so here's a here's a dumb example that that I've used so [clears throat] let's say that uh in some in some universe there's the the highest fitness belongs to a particular shape triangle right and so so you you crank a bunch of generations and you find the first angle and you crank a bunch more generations you find the second angle well now you the third one you don't have to look for you know exactly what it is because you get this this amazing free gift that once you know two two angles you know the third.

So in some sense evolution just saved a third of its time right because if you didn't have that you would have to go find the third angle. So so that kind of thing it's not it's a constraint yes but for the biology it's not so much a constraint it's a it's an enabling feature. It means you can go faster. And there's there's tons of stuff like that that that you get these things these these mathematical relationships of facts of computation where you don't have to do the whole truth table once you have your you know your your voltage gated ion channels you got your transistors the truth table comes naturally after that and right and these properties you don't have to go look for them they you're you're hand they're handed to you. So I feel like evol um uh biology is precisely the set of things that uh exploit those kinds of those kinds of things.

So I want to add to this notion of the free lunch because this interesting phenomena that we see in at least in the AI kind of models is that algorithms that don't normally work are actually working a lot better now as a model gets to a certain level of competency. So like things like evolutionary search, reinforcement learning, these things if you tried to train a model from scratch it'd be hopeless. there's no way to get any kind of but if you do it on a model that's like already pre-trained it works remarkably well. So like there are papers now showing that if you do evolutionary search on models [snorts] that are like seven billion parameters or more you would think that that would like not work at all because it's seven billion parameters that's very high dimensional space but you know evolar search perturbations actually can give you like performance improvements on downstream things which is something that is interesting because it kind of begs the question is that as things become more competent things that didn't work previously seem to be working a lot more effectively now. Yeah. would you mind um popping some links into the into the chat? I haven't seen those from the computer from the from the CS side of things, but but I'll tell you from the biology, this is something that um we've been writing about for a while that evolution, I think, works quite differently on an on a competent substrate. So, right, when when you have when you have cells [clears throat] that can actually solve problems on their own, it's a completely different story because because the the if the mapping between a genotype and phenotype is not uh hardwired, right? If it's if it's actually an interpretation an intelligent interpretation process, then then some some very interesting things happen to evolutionary search and it goes much faster and it finds much more interesting things. So having that having that middle layer that that the translation layer which you know morphagenesis basically the having that be competent um to greatly potentiates evolutionary search. So >> yeah I kind of imagine like these Lego blocks being like the chances of the molecules forming like a cube or something is very low but Legos forming a cube is much higher in the sense that it can probably do random perturbations just like create something that is structured.

>> Well there's a there's a there's a there's another effect here which is which is this. So imagine um one of the things that uh that the biology that morphagenesis is very good at is getting to the same final outcome even when things change. Right? So so if you move if if you change up the circumstances, it's really good at at getting to the same thing. So imagine what happens.

Imagine you've got this and and so so for example, if you make a tadpole where the mouth is like on the back of the head, eventually that mouth will come around to where it needs to be and you got yourself a normal frog. Oh, it's crazy. You can scramble. But we made these things called Picasso tadpoles where we scramble the cranium facial or [laughter] like the mouth is out here, the eyes back here. Like they still make normal frogs because all this stuff moves around until you get a nice frog face and then and then that's it, right?

So imagine imagine what happen uh imagine what happens with um who is it?

Yep. Um imagine what happens with with evolution then. Right. So, so most mutations are deletterious because it's much easier to screw things up than to right than to do good things. So, so imagine you have a but but but also uh uh most mutations have more than one effect, right? They're most So imagine so you have your tatpole, you make a mutation. The mutation does two things.

It moves the mouth off to the side, but it also has some other beneficial effect somewhere somewhere else. Well, if the material was a direct mapping from genotype to phenotype, you would never see the consequences of this other mutation because the mouth was off to the side. The thing would starve and that's the end of that. And so you would have to wait until you got that same mutation without the without the the mouth effect. Um, right. And then uh and and then so that would take a lot longer. But instead instead what happens is you make the mutation, the mouth fixes itself and you get to explore what were the consequences of the other side effects, right? because because it actually makes up for a lot of those things. So what happens is it turns that that aspect of it turns a lot of uh delletterious mutations into neutral into neutral ones. And then what happens is and we have a bunch of computational work on this uh if you actually simulate that process. What happens is that it becomes very hard for selection to actually see the genome because if you have a beautiful looking tadpole, you don't know if the genome was amazing or if actually the structural genome wasn't so good, but it fixed everything along the way. And so what happens then is that you see if you look at where evolution is doing all the work, it ends up doing doing more work on the actual competency mechanisms instead of the actual the structural stuff. But if you do that, then it becomes even harder to see the structural genome. And so more and more of the so you get onto this positive feedback loop where eventually you get this really unreliable medium but it doesn't matter because the algorithm is amazing and it fixes you know whatever happens and if you take that to its logical conclusion you end up with something like a plenarian. So in plenaria right and so there's a whole spectrum of where these things actually end in evolution. So, so you know, sea elegance is like super super hardwired and then mammals and then amphibians and then pleneria over here. In pleneria, the material is incredibly junky because for reasons we could describe the genome like all the cells have different numbers of chromosomes. They're mixloed.

I mean, it's just incredible. But they're the ones that have the most regenerative regenerative capacity, cancer suppression, u immortality, right? They don't age. And it's not because they have a they have a beautiful genome. It's the exact opposite. It's because the material is so unreliable. All the effort went into the algorithm to to be able to say we already know that the hardware is going to be iffy, but you're going to have to fix yourself and [clears throat] and other other creatures can do that to to to different extents. And and it's I think it's it comes because of the consequence that the more of that you do, the harder it is to select on the on the genome. So all the effort goes into the the the competency part and and so so that's just that's just one of the things that happens. But but having that having that problem solving competency means even though the mutations are random, the outcome actually is not like that at all. It looks it looks quite different.

>> Great. That's awesome. Yeah.

>> So Mike, if if I can jump in and sorry, I was a little late. I was teaching. Um, one of the things that this sort of reminds me of is the deep kind of pertinence of understanding. Some of you may know this old paper um by uh Stadler, Stadler, Vagner and Fontana called the topology of the possible um which is about the the genotype phenotype map. And basically what it sort of is arguing is that what is like really important to understand is this process that takes you from you know genotype to phenotype and because of certain neutralities and whatever that you can have like actually that is much more consequential for evolutionary search and and so on. And you know these questions about kind of say local search around competent states and so on makes me think that one of the key challenges that we face in this kind of platonic space view more broadly is understanding what you might call rather than like a genotype phenotype map a kind of like substrate competency or kind of substrate platonic form map that you know I I think you have provided us with plenty of evidence um in your own work [clears throat] that this is is highly non-trivial in sort of the structuring of that map such that um you both have a lot of kind of equifality like you can have very very different substrates pointing to very very similar competencies. Um, you can also have like some kinds of substrates that are very tolerant to some kinds of perturbations in their mapping into competency space, some that are very intolerant. And so, you know, I'm curious if you or anyone else is like I haven't read that paper in like a decade and a half, but like have looked back at some of that old machinery and sort of thought about it in the context of like this problem that what we have to understand if we want to say engineer in ultimately in competency space which is sort of what matters. you know, we really need to understand the sort of topology of that of that mapping.

>> Yeah. The the only thing I'll I'll say about that and hopefully other people um want to chime in is uh the people who who have like like those guys and some others who have um spoken about that that mapping is they generally focus on it's complex. There's redundancy, there's pleotropy, there's um degeneracy like like th those things, right? And that's all and I think that's all right but but I I have a more radical view which is I think it's more than that. I think it's intelligence lit literally I think it's problem solving competencies not not you know most of those descriptions are still at kind of a lower you know um kind of a dynamical systems level but I I actually think a lot of what's going on uh is basically isomorphic with with paradigms from behavioral science where this this is like this is classic you know anticipation habituation pavlovian conditioning you know blah blah blah so I think I think then you get you get more you you you know basically it's it's it's it's like that but on steroids you know because then then once once you really have some competencies about navigating that space the material itself is is helping out like every every layer is doing something and all you have to do is sort of deform the option space for your parts to to to get interesting thing h things to happen at at your level. So, >> so sort of relevant to that kind of going back to Brian Chung's um multi-billion dimensional space or multi you know that that many parameters therefore that size space is it mostly empty?

Well, I think mathematically there's like a dynamic that might be at play where most perturbations aren't harmful, but they do something meaningful in some sense that they don't destroy every capability as much as they change one specific capability more and doesn't you know ruin the whole process. like as Mike was implying like there's a lot of structure for the perturbations for some reason in this parameter space despite mathematically cursive dimensionality and other things saying that there shouldn't be ways of doing this with you know just gausian perturbations and seeing if it works or not. So it's like one of those things where I don't think we this is I mean these are this is very recent work. This work came out like a few months ago. So like I don't think there's a good understanding of why this is possible right now in models that have reached a certain level of competency and it wasn't possible before.

There was an interesting paper that I saw a couple of days ago around how the sort of connections within regions in the brain compressed data or compressed the sort of useful information. And they did the study on like 100 so I think this was like 96 participants fMRI data and they found that most of the connections between regions I think it was like four four or 5% of the connections between regions were basically the very important regions and the rest of it was depth and redundant for the overall computation um or mostly redundant.

My thought is when we're thinking about these sorts of spaces computationally, are we thinking about some dynamic where exploitation and exploration of that space work in sort of lock step with the compressibility of that data object such that that data object makes that observer or that agent able to do more as in gives them more v you know more variation in what they can do next. And you know when I was thinking about when Brian said that you know you get certain competencies that don't work as sort of a base log model and you have to train it until that competency becomes useful.

Is that because again we're going to this point where you have to have some foundational structure or some foundational organization that's very basic that gives you some low-level sort of foundational brick understanding before you can build the wall on top of it. And once you have that layer, then you can start and it sort of speaks to one of in Blaz's paper that sort of phase transition that happens when a [clears throat] group of things come together. In that example, are there enough, you know, is there enough training to then be able to take an abstract the abstraction a layer up in that map from, you know, the base layer to like the satellite view and now the satellite view I can do slightly more.

And the way the thing that I'm work, you know, I'm working on observer theory, which is sort of how to model a computational possibility space in the set of all possible computations. When you look at some of the work that's been done on both evolutionary algorithms with sort of one-dimensional cheering machines and also bulk orchestration when they take properties from the whole and not the part, it seems like there is a dynamic where you get these stepups in the very basic forms of those computational systems where new things don't go in the linear fashion. They sort of have some dynamic equilibrium on a linear line and then they just jump up. They find some novel rule. they find some novel rule that was already there that they could already select from and that just gives you the free lunches straight away because you're you've gone up to a different level of competence.

So from now on, whenever you change a rule, you're never going back down that exponential curve if you're surviving and if you're continuing. And that's sort of one of the ideas that I thought speaks to not only how we construct differences and categories as observers like us, but also how we balance those sorts of evolutionary strategies within this aggression model. Because clearly if we have some top down pull whether it's an attractor or something else the balance of whether that's being that seems like and it's an exploratory thing like we are pointing at an attractor and going for it or are we exploiting something within that sort of well or that tractor well to find that out. They seem like two different things where one is sort of discovery of something we're already in which costs us very little because we're already there and the other is quite high cost because we have to try and make lots and lots of you know lots and lots of guesses about how to get to the next jump the next sort of exponential jump in capability.

Yeah, I feel like this is kind of like this reminds me of this notion of like functional information which I've just started reading about which is apparently this idea of like reposing the notion of information or complexity as this idea that once things become composable the amount of combinations that can possibly exist explodes and that's much more functional in some sense. So you can imagine like if you create a binary system suddenly now you can create you know permutations that are larger than the number of possible atoms in the universe things like that right and I think like this composability and the number of permutation space dramatically growing creates like a lot more functionality to that space as well this this speaks to um so you know information obviously super overloaded there's you know like chand information fisher information kogor information etc but um the the um uh The thing that is missing from kulgorov information um which I think is really important is this notion of compositionality uh or or scale. Um you know the the the um the experiments that I that I showed you know kind of I I think uh give give one a sense of how um noise or you know or random bits can get turned into algorithmic information. you know, there's the in a way I think I think of life as an engine for turning, you know, random encounters into into algorithmic information that gets baked in to, you know, how to make stuff, you know, how to how to do stuff in the future. Um, but also the fact that it that it composes uh, you know, hierarchically, you know, that you get a composition and then those things compose and those things compose and so on gives all of that a multiscale and compositional quality that isn't captured by the normal komog sense of things. So I I feel like there's some pretty basic theory work to do there um to um you know to understand to understand scale in information as well um that would that would give us a much better handle on on um the information theoretic properties of life.

Do you think um layers that like the epiplexity paper fins paper about structured information was open AI sponsored paper do you think that sort of measure can be adapted for this sort of function because it's a real that was one of the most interest because you have problem sharing information infinite you know they're infinite systems so they're not hugely useful in the way >> yeah I think a perplexity is one is one uh route. Um there are also things one can do um with conditional comor of complexity or conditional kagor of information that um uh Eric Elmos Nino has has done a little bit of playing with. Um uh so yeah, I think there are promising you know there there are definitely some some some promising uh directions. I I I'm not I'm not sure any of them has a complete theory as yet.

I I I like the uh I like the uh inclusion of exploration here because because one thing that has been completely missing from like our efforts to recognize diverse intelligence have been entirely for our practical reasons have been entirely focused on some sort of goal directed competencies and you know which which is only one half of the equation because then there's exploration and play. So right. So so so part of uh in I think part of cognition is non- goal directed uh just sort of messing around to see what happens.

Right. So so play and we know what creative play looks like in mammals and birds. I think we're terrible at detecting it in other un like in um in unconventional embodiment. And so, so I spend a lot of time recently thinking about what what what would that look like in cells and and tissues and molecular networks like if we step away from the idea that it has to be oh it's this way because it serves some very practical purpose or it's going to this goal or the whole thing evolved because it did something important. What does, you know, what does what does creative play look like uh in some of these in some of these systems? And how would we even how would we know, you know, how do you know if uh if uh if a non-conventional system is is playing?

>> Good night. I've been listening to the discussion and you know on the one hand there's sort of this language around competencies which is very sort of agent focused in terms of um skills or knowledge or on the other hand we've got the notion of sort of interfaces or and then functional information and it seems like you know this idea where where do you put your focus you know so on the agent or the environment or in the interaction and I was thinking affordances, you know, the sort of Gibsonian uh poss possibilities for action and that that that that therefore puts your attention very much on the relational properties and so I was thinking then okay so are you if you look at that and you say well something's highly competent well maybe it's then um it's found its way of ex of it's found its affordances in a given context in its environment right so in in that relation you could look at it as an observer and say oh well that that I draw a distinction around that entity and I'll say that is competent because I observe its capacity to to to it's adopted some affordances which I recognize and I say well that's it's good at doing these things now if I put it in another context right change its environment and that might you've been doing that in your experiments you suddenly find this entity which may not have had competencies or rec or you in another environment suddenly picks up these things, right?

Um and so then then I thinking okay so and then there's this talk about structured spaces or or the fact that you know the idea that evolution or or competency might increase in a more structured or a more an environment which is itself perhaps got richer affordances i.e. when you interface or you find that affordance, you get a lot more out of it because it's already semi-structured, right? It's already capable.

So, so and then relate so relating that to your play, right? So maybe there's different ways of if you're in a if you're in a given environment, say you've evolved evolution, you know, evolutionary view where we look at something in a relatively consistent environment that maybe the affordances in the organism environment relation have got kind of locked in a little bit and that maybe you go from a play mode into a more restricted it's working well. um I start to reorganize my uh internal you know my my processes that I'm not in exploratory or play mode I'm in a I'm happy here it's all working well you place that you p you perturb or you place another environment you are now stripped of the affordances which which were working well for you and you you you could perish you could uh you could drop into some low mode of or you may go into some sort of exploratory playful mode where you are uh exploring the affordances in this new relational context to try to pick up on those things and I think the richer that environment is with latent I'm going to make a term active affordances or affordances which may be already like you know there was an an mentioned like an attractor something that you can attach to which gives you a lot for free right so there could a hierarchy of affordances which which depending on your view do you look at competencies when you're agent base uh do you look at uh informed information that's the term if you're thinking about the reception the capacity to receive an affordance or do you look at affordances themselves so I think that the l the the discussions or language can be maybe may may benefit from drawing the distinctions about what perspective you're taking of the agent uh agent environment or their relationship, you know, and and that that that for me when just observing the discussion is is perhaps a useful sort of uh thing to bear in mind that that the language changes and what you might look for changes. But, you know, but when you're talking about interface, interfaces on the one hand sounds very relational to me and competency starts to be more agent-based, right? So, so um agent focused, right? So, that that was just a just an observation I wanted to throw in.

I >> think one of the things I wanted to just come back to is when we think about play, one of the things that I think is useful to consider is when you know the way observers are modeled in sort of computational possibility space is second order cybernetics. So, they have a sort of sense get from the environment and they have an internal model which they update. And the thing I'm wondering is if play is sort of there's a battle there's is play sort of exploration that's more internal model focus where you're sort of playing within a bounded area of the space you're in and that is therefore with low risk letting you update your internal model to then expand the accessible space that you've got in the future versus say actual exploration where you take all of those learnings from play and you training or whatever else you're doing to get those get that um get those skills and get those affordances. And then real exploration is when you're then moving it into the real world. So you're taking that updated internal model, that thing that you've looped around through play to then attack some problem in in the real space that was riskier. You wanted a sort of embed more or find more equivalences for when you were doing that play loop. And that's is that sort of what functional play is doing? Is it like a bounded version of the whole environment, you know, shrunken down into into your internal model, trying to take advantage of something you've come across before that's sparsely related within your internal model few relations by doing that loop just like practicing and learning how to cook or learning how to play an instrument. By running that loop internally, that is effectively functional play that's letting you do something or affording you something in a future state where your internal model is predicting that this these equivalences will be valuable later for growing the size of your accessible space.

>> Carl, did you want to say something? You had your hand up.

>> Yes. No, I just wanted to um sort of endorse the last few points and uh [clears throat] so um in the context of a sort of non-biological physicist's approach to self-organization um that um you can derive the most likely path into the future that looks like you know this is how this system chooses to behave and interestingly um one the imperatives for the most likely paths do have this sort of epistemic playful aspect and a sort of instrumental aspect. So in my world that's called epistemic affordance and that to my mind that would be exactly this sort of curiosity this play that is quantified by the information gain that you can sort of write down as a relative entropy or a cha divergence. The interesting thing though this is only the case you can only if you like um derive [clears throat] the epistemic affordance as a the natural behavior of certain kinds of things when you've got exactly what you were talking about before which is this sort of um sparse deep hierarchal structure. So when the inside of the internal model, deep inside the internal model can no longer see the interface, the actions that it's prosecuting or exchanging at its interface with the world, then you can interpret the inside as exactly a good regulator or a generative model, but crucially one which looks as if it is planning into the future to maximize the information gain. But this can only happen when you've got this deep sparse structure.

you got sort of nested Markoff blankets.

Uh if you if you're just a single cell organism with just one blanket, you can see what you you you have direct access to your action upon the world. But if you've got a deep structure, complex structure structurally speaking uh with this sort of you very much like a sort of deep learning model, then you get that you you get this as an emergent property. So I thought it was a nice connection between the notion of play and information seeking and one could even argue sort of reasoning you know I ain't going to do this because then I will know or it'll look like that and this deep sparse structure uh that you were talking about before in terms of um the you know the brain for example the brain being empty of connections. So I have friends who work on connetoics using anatomy and if you think about the brain as a collection of connections they say it's almost empty of all the connections you could have there are hardly any there. Uh and I think that speaks again to this sort of you know sort of um minim minimum description length compression minimizing commod complexity but at different scales where the scales are defined by the hierarchal structure. I I couldn't resist sort of joining your everything you've said makes entire sense uh and it all so to my mind certainly is internally consistent and to apologize I have to go and do a podcast now so I didn't want to I'm not bored I it's brilliant but I I will have to slide away in a few minutes.

>> Oh thanks Carl. um well for whatever time you're still here and anybody else.

Uh does that mean then that we could take what you just said and apply it on an evolutionary scale and say that the the many sort of I guess you could call them markoff blankets between the genotype and the phenotype mean that overall the whole process might not be it might it might exhibit competencies that aren't as as blind and dumb as as it's supposed to supposed to be.

>> Yeah. I mean that that that that also occurred to me cuz you got again the separation of scales. So I think the sort of um you know the whole point about deep models in deep RL or deep models in multisellular organisms um speaks to the fact as you get deeper into the system time and scale slow down or get bigger and I think the perfect example of that is you know the scale free or scale invariant aspects of evolution in of itself. Absolutely.

Interesting.

And Mike, this does remind me of something that I know um Sam Creman has been thinking about um you know, which is this idea that like although I think we often tend to like boil down the sort of evolutionarily salient part of some entity to like a fixed point in like or a sort of static point in time. In fact, what is seen by selection is a trajectory of the organism through its sort of possible configuration space.

And what is so you know fitness is not computed in some sense at one point in organismal configuration space. It's sort of a an integral along these family of possible trajectories through organismal configuration space. And so I think like taking does that make sense?

>> I well it makes sense to me but but I I think that's a pretty controversial claim in the standard neodyarwinian synthesis. The idea is supposed to be that both the foresight and the hindsight are supposed to be pretty much zero and that uh it it doesn't like like we've toyed with with models where there's some sort of metadata on each alil to say what was it before and how did that work out like you can make those kinds of things and we're we're playing with some of those models but I think that at least the standard obviously there's people who who did to disagree with this but but I think the standard view is supposed to be that all you have is what you're doing right now that that is the only thing that fitness can see is whatever whatever you're doing right now. So I mean I do think that's that's restrictive but but you know that I I think that's that's the that's highly controversial. M um oh go ahead sorry >> do you think that sort of when you think about evolution and fitness do you think that given the type of discussion [clears throat] around sort of platonic star spaces that you know survival and continuing genes is enough to have this discussion and bring evolution into this sort of discussion or do you think it needs to have some informationational component I mean one thing that came out of the last talk was sort of this Tim Jackson's discussion on convergent evolution and those convergent structures seem to you know maximize sense data at least in the sort of very basic or how much of a certain space or a certain type of space you can access whether that's through you know sense data or you know being able to fly or application if you're a bat or a dolphin do does this sort of conception of atomic space need to have some informationational component because when I think about observers or you Not just in you know animals all the way down. do what the properties that that we think about persistence which is sort of that survival point but also computational boundaries like how much you can do what your computational capacity is and one of the things that I think needs to be considered if we're thinking about a space of attractors is what are the properties of those attractors in relation to the properties of the agent or the properties you know what what are we measuring against is really critical here and look there's a lot of work being done because of LLMs and AI on different statistical measures for useful information or how things comport in state space can those sorts of ideas be adapted for biological evolution is the question I'm not a biologist so I don't know that answer I thought it would be interesting given the quality of the group >> yeah I mean I I I personally am very suspicious of the idea that survival and replication is the main driver. Um I mean I know that's how it's supposed to be. I'm I'm not I don't know. I'm I'm not sure that's true at all. And for a number of reasons, but but one one thing is that in order to in order to have that in the first place, you have to already have your replicator and you already have to have the thing that has differential fitness and you know the thing you have to p worry about it persisting and it has to defend itself and all of that. But there are some very interesting dynamics which we'll we'll preprint and and I think in about a week uh of what happens [snorts] before you get replicators and obviously Blaze has some has some stuff on this as well but um there's there's some things happening before you can point to something and say there that's that's a thing that's going to have differential success. So whatever is happening before isn't driven by that and and so there's some underlying dynamic which for us seems to be a positive feedback loop between learning and causal emergence.

They it's the thing sort of ratchets itself up by by learning and causal emergence. But but before that's in in a weird I mean I don't even know that we have a proper vocabulary for it yet because it's happening in a pool of like this this sort of pregnant medium sort of that you can't really very easily draw circles around. Okay, that's the thing that's reproducing because the materials are sort of all over the place. They come and they go and it's, you know, there's not a single thing.

But you can already see that these loops are sort of pulling themselves up by their bootstraps and then eventually what happens is that the the the causal emergence hits and and and suddenly you get you get rep you get a replicator and now now you're off with the to the more conventional, you know, sort of optimization optimization part.

There's a really I mean there's a really interesting thing hint I I first of all I'd love to see those those results Mike that sounds fascinating. Um they also uh they certainly jive with a lot of things that I've that I've been seeing too and and they point out something that I think is actually really important in all of this which is that um you know in in normal biology the coarse graining is always uh given you know there's just this presumption that you know what the thing is that is uh that is that is replicating and obviously you know um the Dawkins selfish gene thing was you know very provocative because it you know it proposed a different coarse graining that you know that that was that people weren't used to you know that it was the that it was the gene that that was the thing um you know in addition to emphasizing competition etc.

It was just like an alternative course grading but obviously you know a coursear grading is just a model um you know there's nothing there's nothing that says you know one course grading is correct and another is not. uh you know any any given course grading allows you to write down equations to look at dynamics to you know ask about um about reproduction and uh and it's not trivial because uh you know a a course screen grading requires that you be able to say when something is or isn't an entity when something is or isn't another instance of the same class of entity.

Um, you know, is something transformation? Is it reproduction? Uh, you know, is it is it another of the same? And, you know, for for organisms with complex life cycles, you know, the question of like, well, is the, you know, is this next stage the same species or is it actually one species giving rise to another, giving rise to another, you know, like it's like, you know, these these questions come up all the time or or, you know, is is a hive an instance of a thing or only or only the bee, you know, and and the answer, of course, is is both and all of the above. um in in the period before you get um cell membranes especially you do you really don't have an obvious coarse graining at all. you just have all these loops and interactions that seem to be autoc catalyzing each other and um and and and then there's some point at which I think when you know what our intuition is that the thing has a model of itself right for me you know autopoesis you know is something that we recognize when we assert that the that the thing that is doing the autopoes actually has a self model uh and and therefore is is you know is is following that self model in order to construct more of that more of that self. Um and um you know but but again like it takes a model to recognize a model. So all of these things are are completely relational. You know you can't you can't make any truth statements about them without presupposing um you know a course grading. So um this this sort of relational view of what of what life is um strikes me as as uh being kind of like the equivalent of relational quantum mechanics or something. I think it's like something that hasn't really been well theorized uh and and would make would make a lot of the paradoxes uh go away by just pointing out that you know that that you can't make any of these statements without without u positing a perspective and of course grading going along with that.

Yeah, I I I think that's really critical and uh Josh Bongard and I have been um playing with this in terms of polycomputing and this this notion of uh different observers who see the same physical um events as different computations and some recent work this this isn't out yet either but but some some recent work um trying to trying to simulate this stuff looking at if if there is a and we do this with a model of gene regulatory networks but the idea is if evolution has a choice between scaling up the competencies of the material, the individual networks versus leaving the material in place and instead uh working on adding different uh observers who see the exact same thing going on but but they are able to to to to map a different course grading and a different set of interpretations on it. Um the answer is evolution prefers to be able to do both. But if it has to choose one, it'll it'll it'll scale the observers rather than mess with the material. And I think, you know, part of part of it is because if you if you start messing with the material, you screw up com you screw up dependencies. If there was something else that was dependent on it, now you're, you know, now now things downstream are going to go wrong.

Whereas, if you leave the material in place and simply add perspectives, then you can sort of overload in some way meaning onto the same thing and not mess up anybody else. Just just keep adding perspectives. And that's quantitatively that's looks like what it prefers to do.

Just as a question to that, would would something like that prefer more observers? Because when you pull a bunch of those observers together with the same properties, they can form, you know, a component like the small network component where they get, you know, parallelization, computational competencies, those three lunges from making more versus like a fixed substrate where they already know, they know it's persistent. Evolution knows it's persistent. And then you go well that's persistent. If I can pick between changing that to make it more persistent or less banded and just making more of the same get the competency from the group of things. This is all again to me it it sort of screams like I'm optimizing for my computational power primarily and then I look as a second order can I maintain persistence while optimizing that. It's a very very hardcore computational view of what's going on. But I wondered what your your view of that is because that's sort of something that you see in some of the again some of the sort of basic experiments around cellular automter and they are very very far away from that but it's the same the reason I'm interested is because the dynamic the dynamic is similar and I wondered if that sort of explan explanation was interesting or something thought about in context of that result. Yeah, I I think that's very interesting. We haven't even gotten to that yet. So, right now, none of the observers talk to each other yet. Um, after after we characterize all of that, we'll do exactly what you said and let them let them form a network, too. We haven't we haven't done it yet. Um, Katrina, did you want to say something?

>> [snorts] >> Yeah, I just wanted to follow on that comment about the importance of the relational nature of what we're talking about and how Leo you had brought up affordances in the environment and I think equally important there is sort of the affordances of other agents in the environment and and so back to that earlier example of play um Yak Ponep the neuroscientist has this kind of widely shared model of play which is more that it's a relational activity between organisms so something like learning to cook actually isn't play under some definitions play is this emotion regulation, social engagement that we that we do in order to like create alignment between us and other agents in the world and it increases synaptic plasticity and kind of gets us into this like mentally labile state. And the reason I think that's important to bring up is because when we've been talking about information and how information gets shared and maybe where where do the free lunches come from, I think of that as being critical in humans that like our free lunches are via human communication. And I'm getting all like right now getting all kinds of information for very low cost or at a highly discounted cost because I'm putting my sort of cognitive architecture in a state where I'm receptive to that.

Um, and that that I think could be what's kind of accelerating our human evolution in intelligence that's taking us further and further away from our genome and more into this kind of information sharing social space.

I can I just respond because um this might be old sort of territory, but the the notion of of play being analogous to the kind of raising of the temperature of a system to explore more of its foreign space in our context. you know that that um that in a stable environment you you know you might get locked into particular kind of affordances. Um but then when that when the environment changes or whatever go into we go into a room with new people we have to explore how to build bridges right how to how to couple with our environment with that environment including other agents and play might be the notion of of of like raising the temperature a little bit to to explore the space of potential couplings or influences and where they might lead Right. Um and so that I mean I think analogies have been made haven't they between evolutionary you know it's interesting that in stat fears and things that people have borrowed evolutionary algorithms to search complex multi-dimensional rugged energy landscapes. Um but equally, you know, trans transporting the some of the concepts of statistical physics back into biology, which of course has been done lots of times, is also valuable in thinking about some of the processes that we're looking at as um search mechanisms um uh in in finding a way of of finding the optimal engagement uh with your environment. Optimal.

Optimal is a hard word, isn't it? I shouldn't have said that. It's um something less than that I think but something that's that uh provides a way of hooking up right uh with our environment that might lead right by exploration and finding those key affordances there might be a ramp and and the more see changing language the more competent right or the more affordances that the particular the environment offers right the the higher I guess we can ascend up up the ramp of of possibilities Please.

>> Yeah, Jacob.

>> Yeah. So, so um I really love this idea and you know, so Allison Gobnik certainly has made some connections between this notion of exploration and a kind of annealing uh point of view. Um I nonetheless don't think we pay enough attention to the role of behavioral plasticity in learning. So, you know, I mean, just simple example that really drove this point home to me. Um, my wife Erica Cartmill will sometimes when she's trying to explain like, you know, very basic like conditioning an animal or whatever to audiences that are not a bunch of physicists will um do an experiment where she will like try doing just like simple reinforcement on a human subject to try to shape some arbitrary behavior. And there is a very strong relationship uh between the um sort of base behavioral plasticity that this person will exhibit and how easily they can be shaped into like the appropriate kind of uh target behavior. So you know someone who just sits there like a wet fish not doing anything is going provides very few um probes into this possible affordance space that is in this case being shaped by a rewarding human interactant but that you could think of as more broadly I mean any kind of relational source of potential reward like if you're just not exhibiting that kind of plasticity you're not going to discover these sort of afford ES in the environment. I think this raises a real methodological challenge um which you know comes back to something you raised very early on Mike about the difficulty of or what we can and can't recognize. I think we're very limited empirically in our ability to sort of probe the capacities of intelligent systems because we have to be able to read the design of the task as in the same way that the system in question is reading it. This is one way to say well you know a lot of the sort of um shortcut learning for example that we see is exploiting an affordance that we were unaware of in the design of uh the particular task. Um and uh so yeah so how do you think about that? um you know what I in my language often talk about as the sort of as relation this sort of like interpretive um layer involved in all of this behavior where the environment is read as having these set of options and our very limited capacity to read the sort of option spaces that are interpreted by I mean it's hard enough to do it with other humans let alone you know something that's radically different in embodiment.

>> Sorry, Katrina, had you had your hand up before? Did I miss that? No. Okay, Blaze.

So I you know one of the reasons that I I somewhat um that I I guess I have some problems with the play concept is because I I think it actually carries with it the assumption that um that you know what we normally do is something other than that you know or that or that like work is the default or that we are optimizing for something uh you know or that or that there is uh you know some some other uh thing you know I mean the the reality is any any living system you know stays alive by virtue of staying alive it doesn't mean that it doesn't mean that it has to be optimizing something there is a you know there is a dynamical loop that you know that is stable enough that it continues to exist and the range of things that can happen you know in the context of such a dynamical loop is very very large I mean this sort of you know Darwinian spenserian idea that if you're not working hard at it you know you're going to die because something else is going to eat your lunch we know is not really you know exactly the case you know for for a lot of organisms in a lot of situations you know there are many things that create lunches for each other there are networks that you know mutually reinforce each other in various ways and that just leaves a lot of you know it leaves an increasing amount of space for other stuff to happen uh so you know it's it's not that I it's not that I think uh you know seeking information uh or curiosity or whatever isn't something that things with intelligence do you know certainly they do it um But you know any of these definitions about play that oh you know it's only about stuff that you know that that satisfies your curiosity or only this only that is a little bit like trying to define art you know it's like well okay except there's this there's this form of play that is you know that is just like I don't know bumping your head you know against something you know there's is it play is it not play is it just a tick you know what is it you know it's it's a it's a very um it's very particular very valuel laden uh very anthropomorphic um you know I I I think that when we look at an at a at a worm doing something fun and we say it's play. We may be doing something that is usefully empathic. It may be that there is pleasure being experienced that there's something about that experience subjectively that is like what we associate with play. It also may not be.

But you know whether or not you know that is uh that is valid to me doesn't speak to you know is it serious or is it not serious. Stuff does all kinds of stuff. So, um I I guess you know that that would be my yeah that's my that's my take on that question for what it's worth. And by the way, I need to switch to uh to uh to phone mode. I'm still still here but may not be on the same video.

>> Uh David, >> so let me chime in here as someone that uh plays music and teaches kids how to play. have taught children how to play music. And um from my perspective as a musician um play is fundamental to music music to learning to how to play music well learning how to compose music and my the way that I experience play in music is um not necessarily information seeking but almost uh pleasure seeking and and maybe just um boredom, taking up time, sort of something to do just to do it. Um that kind of a thing. So I I would say that play is is not necessarily exploration, information seeking at all. It has I think it h can have multiple purposes.

Um I don't know if that's helpful to the discussion at all but I think I think you know maybe almost like will to power just to do something to do something and I I [clears throat] am fascinated by this question of how to distinguish between play and other behaviors like like ants for instance I've spent a lot early in my life I collected a lot of ants right I I spent a lot of I'm looking at ants and um seems like some of ant behavior is um explor exploration like when they're foraging and it's almost random driven just a random walk through the environment but some of it could be characterized more by play as is play or something like that um but I I think that's it's going to be it may be very specific speific to the organism, how you make this distinction and and it probably has to be within sort of this understanding of what the goals of the organism are, what it what what it's trying to do, right? What what is it trying to do? And I think that's [clears throat] sort of a functional approach will will get you somewhere to trying to understand what play is and how to characterize it and how it differs from other things. Thanks.

Yeah, you know, uh just um watching watching cells build an embryo, right?

Especially in time lapse, you know, it's it's that's that's one experience. And then a different experience is watching a bunch of cells expplanted in a dish or in some other context and you watch them running around with not much at least apparent to us happening. And I always think about um you know how uh they they talk about this this sphere of uh t uh television broadcasts that have been spreading out from the earth, right? And I always think about aliens somewhere, you know, and and there's like I don't knowif what 80 light years of three stooges, right? Like spreading out into the world and and and football games and things like this. And I just imagine like the aliens getting that and and and seeing some of that and trying to trying to figure out like what like what is this? Is this is this uh are they are they doing something? Are they are they are they just messing around like trying to understand? And it's basically that, right? We're in that position watching these cells trying to figure out if this is a is this a poor attempt to build something or is this not even that at all and it's a fantastic attempt at at having a you know an enjoyable time exploring the dish or or what the heck is it? Um, Jacob, >> so you know, this is riffing off of a remark that uh Douglas Brash made um in the comments about, you know, okay, well, when you're a kid or when he was a kid, play is like coming up with your [clears throat] own goal and just like kind of pursuing that um as an end and of itself. And I do think that I mean to me this describes uh a capacity that is clearly very important to humans, namely our ability to choose essentially an arbitrary thing and pursue it as an end in and of itself. And you know I think you there's a very beautiful sort of theory of culture um in the work of the uh early 20th century um sort of sociologist philosopher Gayorg Zimmel um in his book um oh god uh I'm can only remember what the German name is. I will look it up and put it in the chat. In any case, he has this theory that sort of culture is built by uh identifying these sort of basic or picking out some sort of core forms of life and like pursuing them as ends of themsel ends in and of themselves. And the mathematician um David Mumford actually has an interesting account very similar of the origins of different parts of mathematics along the same lines that you know like geometry comes from pursuing the idea of space and kind of like fixing on that and exploring it in all of its possible variations. Analysis comes from taking notions of motion and kind of putting them through their paces and so forth.

So, you know, I think this is something we can clearly do as pe as humans. The challenge is recognizing that capacity in radically different embodiment because you know as you as well Bla1 said with the worm you know as you've said Mike with the cells like we know from our own introspective experience that there are cases where we are choosing some arbitrary end and pursuing it simply as an exercise in pursuing that end. What does and we know what that looks like in other people and they can tell us that's what they're doing. Can we recognize that activity which seems to me to be absolutely fundamental to our kind of basic cultural and scientific capacities in other embodiment.

Yeah.

Let me throw something on this. Um, play takes energy and that is something that is going to be selected against too much expenditure of wasted energy, right?

On the other hand, play is fun. So, I was wrestling with this proposal.

There's a couple in one in the chat now from um Leo that there's a correspondence to temperature scale. And so, it would seem like gee, shouldn't play be like low temperature or something because it's fun and easy and maybe is it really an entropy thing rather than an energy thing? And so that uh yeah there's like low constraint.

I see ex exploratory play would be more like the high high temperature regime but but we need to generalize temperature don't we? So you know it could be that the relation that like the in a population a small number might might be more might exploring might be playing more might be exploring on the fringe of this of the the potential spaces of of interaction or whatever. Um and that and that their relation in terms of their size of their population versus the bulk of the population would be like a Boltzman type thing which you can only access at higher at higher effective temperature. It's less populated. So, it's the fringe and they're the more playful and as you go lower in temperature, you get into the more uh uniform regular kind of habituated modes of interaction. That that that was the l that was the thing I was grasping at in in that analogy.

>> Yeah, I get the analogy. So in other words, you're sort of saying I should readjust my thinking that expending lots of energy or so fun is a high energy thing and focusing on a single bit of work that you have to get done by 5:00 today is actually low energy, not fun, but it's sort of like I should look at it as low energy rather than looking at it as high energy. That's what that's what I meant by the entropy business.

But I I think I think that being too being too thermodynamic about this just presumes that we're in too constrained a situation. I mean let's take you know if if you if you take something very very energy constrained like uh you know a chemotactic bacterium close to its point of starvation you know then you know you may be in a you know close to a limit where you know if it doesn't tumble at just the right times then it significantly increases the likelihood that it just will not exist in the future. So you know something like that is you know is going to have to behave like an optimizer which is to say it doesn't have a lot of space to have fun you know like it you know if it's space of behaviors is fumble or don't fumble and making the wrong decision means you know there's no more bacterium then you know it's it's there's not there's not a lot of agency or fun or what have you in a system like that. You know it'll only continue if it does exactly the right thing quote unquote. But but you know for the huge majority of of organisms including unicellular ones you know there's such a range of behaviors and there are so many behaviors that are consistent with continuing to exist. You know if you're doing your chores you know that are like skinning the animal that you just killed you know or whatever and you're like bumping your butt a little bit you know while you do it and like dancing around a little bit while you do it. Like the idea that that the energetic difference between bumping your butt and not bumping your butt is going to make a difference in your survival, you know, is just ridiculous.

You know, of course we're not that constrained. And and I think I think that that's true of the vast majority of of life. And then, you know, I think that I think that this whole teological question of of of fun, you know, kind of vanishes. You just see like, oh, well, there's a lot of turbulence in the system. There's a lot of stuff that happens. It's sometimes emotionally loaded. It's, you know, it's informationally interesting. It can develop cultural dimensions, you know, yada yada yada. But like there's nothing unusual about this. Like the idea that that, you know, that everything is so constrained, I think is just a is just a wrong idea about how life works.

>> Yeah.

I was going to say is it's it sounds like what you've just described is is something like the Maslo hierarchy where right you have to basically be able to say like how >> totally and that almost everything is above the baseline of the Maslo hierarchy when you look at it.

>> Yeah. So you know I I think what you you bring up right is the importance of making some analytic distinctions. I mean using the sort of case of human play as like the paradigm example between sort of like what is behaviorally visible which might be the kind of uh unpredictability of the behavior given some circumstance what are the which I think is closest to the kind of like temperature um the enabling conditions uh which again in the case of human play are typically you know situations where there is a sense of protection where there is a sense of kind of like lower risk to engage in more exploratory behavior etc. And the sort of motivational status in other words like what is the agent who is playing like trying to do in that activity and I think you're absolutely right um blaze with the point about the sort of degree of uh constraint and enabling condition.

I mean there's a beautiful example with the domestication of um these birds the white rumptunia where like their wild type song is like very very characteristic but under domestication as a sort of epipenomenon of the reduced selection pressure they started to develop like much much more variable song behavior and like now I don't know if anyone has heard them but they have these like amazing songs. There's lots of variation. There's lots of variability. And you know, this is presented um by folks who work on the evolution of language and sort of the uh domestication as sort of evidence of sort of reduced selection pressures uh reduced constraints like opening up at least some degrees of freedom for like greater variation. and it it in this sense kind of like play across evolutionary time.

So yeah, I mean I think it is very important to keep in mind how rare it is that we actually see you know organisms against the like bare metal of survival.

Um >> you think Jacob that did they find any anything in the compositions of the songs? Were they more complex or more rich when they >> Oh, yeah. Yeah.

>> So, so they explored that thing that was, you know, [clears throat] maybe fun for them to do in a way that was beyond its survival mechanic. It really went into sort of I have more space, more computational capacity. I don't have to find food anymore. Therefore, I can now put more energy into making these songs more rich, more complex, more coherent.

>> Absolutely. Okay.

You know what fits nicely with that idea is the prevalence of play in human children versus adults because at least if you're a human child in a relatively safe environment you've got that kind of domestication situation and you have the ability to play and explore a lot and then as you get older you're like oh I better get serious about my life and the selection pressures are more apparent to you maybe >> I mean that is also consistent with like what is supposed to be happening ing in the academy, right? The term scholar comes from the Greek schol which means like leisure. You know, the idea is supposed to be that you're protected from some of these forces so that you have time to play intellectually. And you know, I mean, I do think we a lot of what we do is creating these spaces for play like this one. So, >> but um as we get when we come become adults though we play less partly because of constraints, financial constraints, other kinds of constraints. But could it also be that we [clears throat] get bored with life?

That we just get bored with life?

L lose the will to live maybe even. Um I wonder you know one thing that makes me think this makes me think a lot about is Nichch's characterization of life as will to power right so maybe that's really what life is ultimately about is exerting some kind of power over your environment and and uh play just one of those ways of exerting your power right is that that's what fundamentally life is about.

>> Very postmodern view of what life is about.

>> What >> very postmodern that view it's like everything's a pain, you know, it's taking everything's a power game. the like the biological limit and I I I I don't know like you know my reaction is that it's sort of quite a shrunken down version from personal experience. It feels like there's probably a bit more to it than that and that we can reduce it to that because it is easy easier to investigate that in finite time with metrics and with tests and when you can sort of say that but when you extend time out that might just be a function of the fact that the tool is not the tool sees that that's about how the tool we have today and that the tool in fusion may see it differently and I think that that's an error in that sort of line of postponist thinking. that is almost terminal alone long time scales but that's a personal view that that sort of just to give the corollery that I don't think it can just be that >> well I I I don't mean to put all the the pol I don't mean to associate it with all the politics of postmodernism and power structures and all that but but I think what Bla1 said in the chat is sort of like it it's life is just doing stuff right power in the sense of that kind of will to power like the will to live right. I mean it's like very fundamental right I mean and maybe even preeds maybe it even precedes reproduction right maybe the fact that life forms reproduce is a manifestation of something deeper right why even bother to reproduce why even bother to go on living right I don't know getting maybe too deep here but >> I I think the only also a different perspective to see it. We also leave also lose the the openendedness of the play. Meaning when be our child we don't know the limitation. We are exploring the limitation. We don't know lower details that are constrain us today. We have great ideas. We thought about we don't even go and make deep on those ideas to do to see why it cannot work.

we think that they can't walk. We find a way to make it. So maybe we play is not is not to know too much.

Well, but I mean one of the really interesting things about children is that they both play a lot and love repeating things. So like they they actually get they exhibit quite different properties visav human beings or sorry v adults um with respect to both like variability of behavior and like getting bored like they you know love having the same thing happen over and over and over again um and you know there's a conrle of that that says that in both cases what is it is about I mean in a nichian register is just like affirmation like they just like affirm whatever they're doing. Like I'm singing this song for the 16th time.

I'm very excited about that. I'm going to go do some random other behavior. I'm also very excited about that. So like you know from an existential standpoint I mean I do agree with you David about this point about getting tired of life but you know I I think um the way to look at least to children as models of this kind of like radical capacity uh for not getting bored with things is both to play but also just to like radically affirm you what's happening.

>> There's a there's an interesting piece of data that [clears throat] uh I think speaks to which which I think is is deep and it hasn't been dealt with that I think speaks to something that David was was bringing up. Um this guy did these experiments where um he would uh he would take a rat and throw it in a bucket of water and the rack can tread water for a couple of minutes and then it and then it drowns, right? And that's and that's what happens. So then what he would do is he would throw the rat in, wait a minute, 45 seconds, take the rat out, dry him off, put him back in the thing. You do that a couple times and basically the rat learns that he he's going to be rescued and then you find out that a rat can actually tread water for about an hour. So So this is very interesting, right? So the physiological reserves are sufficient to keep going for an hour. Why do most rats drown after a minute and a half or you know two minutes? So there's some version of giving up that's and I I don't know that that's available to insects for example but it seems to be available to at least some mammals where if in the hopelessness of it you and and and you think about what the evolutionary scenario is like you would think that evolution would greatly select for a terminator-like behavior where look if I if you've got the physiological reserves just go to the last moment one time out of a thousand something will happen you'll get rescued that certainly should be the the the you know the the the favorable phenotype, right? And yet and yet that's not what happens. And at least in the mamalian case and and I you know there's there's other examples of this in birds and things like this where they have the ability to actually give up and say you know what freak forget it this yeah I could keep going but I'm not going to and and I and I think that's interesting and and how that interplays with evolution is interesting. You wouldn't predict it from standard Darwinian principles. I don't think you'd predict this.

I mean one of the things that one of the one of the tools in observer theory is this idea of like a limit of your possibility space from the observer's perspective i.e. what you think can possibly happen versus what you're predicting right now what normally happens. So these spaces, one is, you know, the field is smaller than the edge of your state space. And when you pick the rat up out after a minute, you're creating an equivalence where that where that field or that state space gets bigger or approaches the boundary of what it thinks is possible. And because you have that equivalence after reinforcing it enough times, that becomes part of their possibility space.

So they they can they can then go in their internal model when they're creating that loop they go oh this happened before and this can happen again. So if I wait a bit longer then I can keep going. I once that possibility has been actualized in their internal model for something like a rat it might be might need more reinforcement or more direct reinforcement say us then then it can do it then it sort of accesses that full possibility space because we've created equivalences for it by interacting with it by effectively coupling with it by by giving the rat a proposition you will physically get lifted out of this tile But that proposition is accepted by the app because it can't doesn't have the choice of whether it gets lifted out or not.

But with enough reinforcement that proposition becomes part of its world and therefore a state space expands. So it can then do that thing because you've given it you've given it effectively top down knowledge that it possibility space was bigger than it thought. And that that sort of dynamic of reinforcement and coupling from different observers where you accept and reject propositions that change the morphism is accessible, the choices accessible between states in your external model seems to seems to and that can apply not just in that example. That sort of dynamic can apply at all scales is an interesting way of investigating investigating that difference is how to leave the backs of an idea of platonic space is when we do new things or we introduce a new element to something else that doesn't have that element. We are we are ingressing in platonic space or it's space space or status space whichever word you want to use. We're changing it. And that's like a physical example inression from you. You've changed the things that it can do.

[clears throat] Therefore, it now thinks it can do what it's updated. And that sort of loop is kind of a way to a way to play around with that sort of idea of ingression in a tight physical way.

I do think there is something about I'll tell you I I again my aunts going back to my aunts when I had kept ant colonies and the queen would die if the queen died um and this may all be explainable just entirely biochemically but basically the colony just fell apart even even though they um continued living they weren't foraging and eventually they would just die out. Um it seemed to me looking at it that they lost the will to live once the queen was dead in the colony. Um but you know obviously maybe that's just got a complete biochemical explanation that could be found. But certainly behaviorally that's what it looked like.

They lost the will to live.

We have a lot of interesting things going on in the discussion in the chat.

Someone brought up galaxies earlier.

I mean, I wonder at a really deep deep metaphysical level. Maybe that's what existence is is actually like why is there something rather than nothing, right? Have you ever thought about that question? I mean, obviously we all have, but it's it's a question that it's still I don't think anyone's got a good handle on. Maybe there's something rather than nothing because the universe wants to do stuff, so to speak.

>> You know, to Dave David to [clears throat] your previous point in about the ants as to whether there would be a biochemical explanation. So I I think there's there's always a biochemical story to be told of anything or or a bio you know or a physical story to be told but I to me it's almost like um it it's it's like the neural coralates of consciousness you know like yeah you could tell that story and the question is uh it's it's not false exactly because it does accompany and it does sort of implement the thing you're talking about but in most interesting cases that low-level story is not the most insightful story. Um, so I'm sure I'm sure there's some biochemical fact about it to be to be found, but there's probably a a more a more interesting level to it, I would think.

>> Yeah. Well, I mean, you know, the ants get, you know, pherommones from the queen giving them instructions to do different behaviors and >> but, you know, so, >> you know, no doubt, right? But like, you know, if if you watch two brilliant, I don't know, two two brilliant mathematicians discuss some proof and you come away saying, "Look, here there was a bunch of air molecules and they moved like this and then like that, like you're not wrong exactly, but but you've missed the whole point. You haven't facilitated the next interesting thing that might happen there. It's just, you know, you've picked you've picked you've picked poorly as far as the level of description. So, I don't know. Well, >> yeah, it's it would be an interesting experiment to try to reproduce say like a robot queen you inject into an ant colony that has all the right pherommones and everything it's secretreting, but does it does it have does it play the exact functional role of a real live queen in the colony?

>> Do you know do you know the book uh this the soul of the white ant from the 20s, Eugene Marie? Have you seen that?

>> Well well worth it if you're into ants.

uh the soul of the white ant by Eugene Marray back from like 23 or something.

Um, it's really amazing and he does all these and I don't it's been years since I read it so I don't remember everything but it he he did all these experiments and it's stuff like there's a colony and if and if an ant from one colony goes to another colony they kill it but if he goes over there and the queen is dead they take him in and and he becomes like all this stuff and he was trying to work out how they know and the you know distance and putting barriers in all this stuff. Um really really remarkable. Well, well, actually, when I was do in my own experiments, I would try when a queen died, I would try to introduce a new queen into the colony to see if they would take it.

>> Sometimes they would, sometimes they wouldn't.

>> Um, I mean, it may be species. It may vary with the species, too, obviously, I think. But well, I think uh this has been this has been great. Um does anybody else have any parting uh parting last thoughts?