Título: Platonic Space discussion 5
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tawlbcxjGJ4
Duración: 118.5 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Panel discussion 5

I could share something if everyone's okay with it. I I last week I started off with a little presentation based on the discussion. I had a bunch of new ideas and so I whipped up another little something I'd like to show you all about a um a potential mechanism for ingression in general because I think there's a really clear example uh from economics about how it works. So I'll try to to go through this pretty briefly and we'll see uh what kind of ideas come out of that. So everyone's uh seeing this presentation.

>> Cool. So this is this is uh that was a yes.

>> Yes.

>> Sick. Thank you. Uh so this is about uh what I'm calling strong perception. It's a way of of perceiving the environment by coupling to invariance in it. I think it provides a general mechanism for ingression based on uh all kinds of patterns. I've written various essays on it at this URL here. So, as we're all kind of here to discuss, we have this kind of interesting situation where there seems to be these non-physical patterns that ingress into our world, like how the prime numbers influence when cicas emerge. But there are also physical patterns and other patterns as well, like economic patterns, social patterns, psychological patterns, etc.

that we also seem to align to in some way. And so, the question is, are those all different kinds of things or is there some general mechanism underlying all of that? And what I'm basically going to argue is that there is a general mechanism here which is strong perception. So in contrast to strong perception is probably the more typical way of thinking about perceiving the environment which I'm calling weak perception over here which is by the way just a terminological thing. It doesn't mean it's worse or inferior. It has in fact some significant advantages. This is just like the history of the terminology. But basically weak perception is how we typically think of it working which is you taken data from the environment through your eyes and ears. You feed that into some kind of internal model and in doing so form some picture of reality and then decide uh on what you should do on that base. You're making inferences. You're doing computations. It's all that stuff.

Strong perception is basically an extension of the James Gibson idea of direct perception where you just directly couple to things in your environment and do perception that way.

So a classic example is how a baseball fielder can catch a fly ball. Rather than doing things the weak perception way where you would calculate the trajectory of the ball and run to where you think it's going to go, you instead couple to the ball by maintaining a visual relationship with it. As long as you hold a constant in your vision in a particular way and you just run in a way that makes that happen, you will end up where the ball is going. Uh not by computing a model but just by holding some relationship with the environment steady. So just by coupling to something in the environment. So I didn't know Carl was going to be in this but here I am quoting him as he said uh in a 2013 paper. An agent doesn't have a model of its world. It is a model. So that is the strong perception view. What makes this kind of coupling possible is an invariant. It's a regularity that hold some scale and substrate. So this works because basically the environment isn't random. There are patterns to it. There is structure. So just by relating yourself to the environment, you can then navigate it in reliable ways. These could be the classic example of this from Gibson is the optic array. There are basically rules about how light bounces off surfaces in the environment.

So when that light comes to your eye, it's not just some random thing. It reflects these regularities. And so by coupling to those regularities, you can, you know, act accordingly.

[clears throat] There are also non-physically lawful but still reliable invariance such as red light means stop, green light means go. Not a lot of physics obviously, but it's still a stable enough fact about the environment that you can just couple to the red light green light pattern in your traffic environment and drive safely without having to think too hard about what's going on. And so what that brings us to is a potential mechanism for ingression, which is that patterns can reach you through an invariant. All you need to do is align to some local parameter and distant events are going to flow into your behavior without you even having to know that that's what's happening. So there's a very nice example here from economics, a very kind of typical textbook thing here, which is suppose there's a weather event in Vietnam, some frost that hits coffee growing regions, which as a coffee drinking American, you might never even hear about happening. Most of us probably not following weather events in far away regions. But what's going to happen is that because the supply of coffee is going to be reduced by this uh this shock, the price of coffee is going to go up. So you're going to see some invariant which is the relationship between prices and other things in the environment affecting the availability of coffee. You're going to see a change in that invariant. And what that's going to do is shift your behavior. Not because you're consciously thinking about it, but just because you are coupled to prices through your budget constraint. You only have so much money.

So if the price of coffee goes up, you are forced to change your behavior in some way. That's what it means to couple to this invariant. By maintaining your budget constraint, by not spending more money than you have, you are forced to adjust your behavior as the price of coffee changes. And what that does is you're going to buy less coffee because it got more expensive, which now aligns you to weather events in Vietnam. So without you ever realizing it, just by maintaining your budget constraint and respecting the price of coffee, your behavior starts to reflect patterns about weather in Vietnam. And so what you could think of this is that this could be ingression in a very mundane way. If you think of Vietnam as some other world, then its events seem to ingress into your own through the price system, aligning you to it without your awareness. In fact, without the help of prices, you could argue it is another uh realm because the weather event is outside your cognitive lightcomb. So the proposal I have here is that this is the general ingression mechanism. Invariants in the environment are the pointers or interfaces to patterns in platonic space and we align to these patterns by coupling with the invariant via strong perception or as strong perception.

Part of why I think this might be the general mechanism is that it's very efficient because what these invariants are such as prices are bow ties which are able to maintain their uh invariant structure across a huge array of of inputs and outputs or patterns on the organism side and patterns on the environment side. So price, for example, the price of coffee. It takes in a huge amount of of facts about the world, about things going on, you know, weather, agriculture, people's, you know, shopping patterns, all kinds of things going on and feeds that out into all kinds of things you can do with coffee. Do you want a hot brew in the morning, a cold brew in the afternoon?

You can do all kinds, you know, whatever you want to do with coffee. You can make a tiramisu, whatever. So the price even though there's all these different things going on on the input and output side, the invariant relationship price has with the conditions of supply and demand remains. So it's this very efficient way of coupling to uh to these patterns because it just it's it's just so reliable across a huge range of circumstances. And it's not just prices that work this way, but there's bow ties anywhere. Traffic lights, a conductor's baton, the marginal value of a shot in like basketball or something like that is going to organize the game around.

Each of these are a tiny knot that coordinates a huge varied world.

So, uh, something I'm thinking about is that there's a spectrum of invariance by depth of coordination. Instead of thinking of mathematical and physical and social patterns and so on as being different kinds of things, we can think of them as being one uh spectrum where just the sort of reliability of the invariant varies. So mathematical patterns mostly seem to be atmporal hold everywhere in all universes as far as we know. So like very reliable invariants, physical invariants, maybe not quite as, you know, truly universal, but at least in our universe and at least as far as we're going to explore that universe, they're going to be there all the way to something like the the state of a chessboard or the marginal value of a shot in a basketball game, which really just holds for that game in that set of rules.

So to summarize, basically what I'm thinking is that there's one mechanism at every kind of level of the spectrum where step one you align to some pattern by coupling to some invariant. You don't need to even know about the pattern. You just maintain some relationship with your environment. Coupling with the invariant induces aggression. That's a typo. Where the organism behaves as if in anticipating patterns from distant realms, such as how we're all behaving as if we're anticipating weather events around the world through the price system. And then all you need to do is reorganize by just maintaining your coupling to the invariant. As those patterns change, it's like as new events change the price change. You maintain your coupling to the price system by just holding on to you respecting your own budget constraint and that maintains that uh that alignment to the pattern.

So [clears throat] one thing that one kind of insight that comes out of this is that we can see how these patterns in turn exploit us. So we construct prices by um you know just by uh coordinating with each other and that gives rise to prices in coffee and other areas. But what those prices do is they compete for a a finite reservoir which is our total budget the total amount of money people have to spend on things because basically if one price goes up then another price has to go down because otherwise there's not enough money to support the total price system.

And what that does is the the this turns each individual price into a network. So the price system emerges because they're all pulling on this common reservoir of people's budgets. And so the price individual prices actually end up exploiting us to network and scale up into a total price system. So uh that's what I have here which is basically this is a potential mechanism for aggression.

A lot of invariance all on this spectrum math, physics, economics etc. all working according to this kind of pattern. So, I know that was a lot, but I want to stop there and just kind of get people's takes on what they think about that.

And just when you think about these patterns and you have your sort of hierarchy of things that you know change more or things that are permanent, are you suggesting that this the sort of possibility space contains permanent objects just there and that we are sampling them and revealing them or is it the other way that these things are there in this order and that order is you independent of observation.

>> Honestly, I really have no clue. I mean, I think the price system is an interesting example where I think we can observe prices behaving in an agent-like manner where they we create them to coordinate us and then they in turn use us to coordinate themselves with each other and create the price system. But um other patterns don't seem to work like that as far as I can tell. So, honestly, no clue.

David, >> um, this is really interesting. I I have a question about this distinction between the strong and the weak perception you make. Um, let me go back to the tracking example. Suppose you have a moth uh sorry you have a bat tracking a moth in flight and that is strong perception. It's just tracking it. You're saying without any internal representation of the moth in flight. It seems to me that the way that tracking works behaviorally for the for the bat is there is some kind of it may not be conscious but there's some kind of model that's working on its um you know on its physiology to direct its flight its flight. So can you be help me understand that distinction?

>> Yeah, I think basically it's a question of you know what are the the boundaries of the model. So in strong perception you just are the models. You don't use a model to navigate your environment. Your behavior just is a model of the environment. In weak perception, you have some separated internal model that you you use to navigate. And we use both of these for a lot of activities in your life. Like the way I'm sitting in my chair, I'm just directly coupled to it and my posture is just, you know, what's kind of like just the efficient way for me to sit in this chair. But then in other situations, of course, you use an internal model to to plan out your day.

So, humans use both. I'm sure other animals use both as well.

>> Joel, >> so again, okay, you are the model. Let me What about a fish? So, is it more like a fish swimming in a current and and when the the current changes, the fish is going to change anyway because they're just they're not they don't even have to model the current. They're just moved by it. Is that sort of what you're saying? I'm just trying to understand.

Yeah, I think that's a good example. So, the fish is trying to maintain some relationship with its environment, uh, which is the the invariant it's coupling to. I don't know, maybe that's um I wouldn't know in the case of fish, but maybe it's just trying to maintain some um like angle that it's traveling at or something like that. So, it's just trying to maintain like some visual relationship with something in the water, and that's like what's going to determine that angle. And then all it has to do is adjust its body and the current to maintain that. And so without thinking about anything that's going on, it just says I am maintaining this relationship and then I do whatever I have to do to do that. And the result of that, as long as the fish is able to behave effectively, is it is in fact going to do a very good job of modeling its environment [clears throat] or behaving as a model of its environment.

And I'll throw the the paper in the chat as well because it's a really good one that where I got most of these ideas from.

Um, yeah, I'm not sure I completely understand what price refers to here, but I actually built something recently that sounds at least analogous to this.

There's a sort of multi- aent model for uh agents that can listen in on your conversation and then give opinions on things. Um and the interesting thing that that happens you have mean a massive number of agents that could be listening in any given time that they interact with you through lights basically. So each light they can control and if they have something to say they basically pulse the light and then if you touch the light um then basically you can hear what they have to say it'll be translated to audio signal for you. Um but in order to accommodate this you know I had to basically b uh build a system where the AIs evaluate how much they think that they have something to contribute to your conversation. So they they evaluate as a percentage but then also you get to postfacto evaluate it to see if they actually did and then that particular agent doesn't necessarily get to raise their hand quite as high or pulse the light quite as much if they're not perceived as valuable by the by the receiver. So it's kind of an interesting way of navigating um that could apply in some of these contexts as well.

>> Yeah, there is a similar mechanism in the economy where the better you are at making efficient use of scarce resources, the more you can sell those, you know, resources for you take something you transform into something valuable. In turn, that increases your budget and and you can buy more stuff and basically have more ability to influence the allocation of scarce resources in the economy.

Good.

>> And I'm not picky. If y'all just want to talk, uh, feel free.

>> I just wanted to to ask Jo Joel on that where you've got the agents and sort of multi- aents commenting on a paper if you thought about looking at Marcus Buber's research around sort of the explainer architecture that he did on the graph. on the graph theoretic um swarms for discovering new materials. So in lie of them just self uh self reporting on their own argument you have one specialized agent whose job is to basically break whatever suggestion and then you only get you get filtered up only the the ding comes out when it's been challenged internally. So you have iteration on the quality of that debate or that feedback that you're getting because it was producing novel outcomes in those experiments um that he was running and I thought it might be interesting because that sort of adversarial way of way of ranking things might produce better feedback in that type of model. I mean that that's the case in materials but might not be the case in >> yeah in this case you know it's very time dependent because it needs to be you know in your existing conversational stream. So there's sort of that perceptive thing and then also no one so far in this whole thing actually in entire history of when I've done this has done a particularly good of coming up something that the people who are participating in the conversation mean find meaningful and timely. So um that's sort of an interesting sort of catchall at least you know part of it is that latency and translation to the audio signal for the various things that exist at this moment but um yeah [snorts] >> hi yes thanks I feel really outside of my comfort zone here making comments on this because I'm a quantum physicist so I spent all my life just thinking about atoms and um and photons But um I I was at the how the light gets in festival uh this passing weekend and I went to a talk on a philosopher from Oxford uh talking about mental states and Buddhism and how they say that one has no free will and no self depending on how your mental states behave. And basically what she had was just like a chain of mental states that were determined. So it really reminded me a lot of what you just showed us because you know it was kind of a similar thing that was like okay you went to her example was you go to a market and you smell a mango and that triggers you know kind of a response and one thing leads to another and and that's how know she she claims our our minds work based on on on the Buddhist philosophy. But what really was very striking for me is that throughout the chain everything was completely deterministic. So this would mean that basically you're saying that thought is computational.

Um but something that um you know made me think a lot is Rogers uh Penrose uh arguments on why humans would not think in this deterministic way.

Um, so I wonder if that could be um interesting or related or anything like that or is it just like a a crazy idea?

So that's a very interesting observation. I think that where I'm going with this is almost the complete opposite direction where what we're seeing actually is that things are very frequently underdetermined where there are there's degeneracy which means there's many ways of of satisfying some task constraints as uh you know in terms of organizing muscles or things going on in your brain or whatever. And so what that does is it forces new task constraints to be added to to make some outcome happen. And it is through that though that that optionality where I think weak anticipation the possibility for that comes from like how do you have some internal model that's in some ways shielded from the environment so it's not just immediately coupling to whatever but can like freely vary and simulate things and it's because you have a lot of options for how to you know which invariance are you coupling to and how particular are you organizing your body at any particular moment to do a particular coupling. There's actually a lot of flexibility there because it's just not actually that deterministic.

And that then gives you the freedom to to choose a solution that also accomplishes other things. Basically, a generalization of that sorting paper, a sorting algorithm paper with uh Mike and and Adam Goldstein and all that where they show that like it's got options for what it can do and so it can pursue other goals along the way.

>> Okay.

Okay. Yeah. I'll I'll I'll keep like uh you know paying attention and and then seeing like like what rings I just for me this this weekend I was just uh very excited with the ideas of like in what way uh are we like not thinking in computational ways um uh because that well according to Roger that's sort of where understanding comes in and it has to do with what you said with having like different options Right. But what's quite interesting maybe that's something I could talk about at some point but I'm not an expert in that that is related to sort of quantum probabilities because the only thing that is really not um deterministic in let's say at the at the atomic level and that would uh affect all the other layers is like uh quantum probabilities and that's how Roger uses to argue that um you know the human mind might not be computational and deterministic and that would be that would be like the root uh of uh understanding and creativity and things like that that um uh computers would never in principle be able to achieve.

That's super interesting because the ecological psychology approach that I'm drawing on the work of people like James Gibson and Michael Turvy and so forth is it's more of a scale-free approach to this kind of optionality where at any scale as long as you have degeneracy you can basically then add additional task constraints to pursue other goals. Uh there might be some synthesis about um combining that with this quantum physics stuff. Uh you would need someone who understands quantum physics though and that's not going to be me. So [laughter] >> yeah well that's here's the other way around. I understand that part and not the other. So no but what's what's very interesting about it is that if you think I mean we see probabilities everywhere right and you would say okay that you could also say in a certain uh circumstance inside a computer you would also have different states with different probabilities. But the thing is like um none of these probabilities are fundamental because they're always determined by something else. No. So the perfect example is a coin where you if you ignore all the details of the like initial conditions and the temperature and the air and all the the things that can happen, this thing looks probabilistic. But if you take into account the system as a whole, it's all deterministic. It's really not.

And then if you have something that's deterministic that is just uh uh computational any any machine eventually would be able to have it. But the probabilities that you have in quantum [clears throat] mechanics are of a different nature. They're fundamental.

There's nothing you can do to recover that sort of losing information. They are they are the only real probabilities.

So and so then that would mean that you know that gives like opens a chance to having um something outside what's computational.

>> So so my my thought on this would be the following. Um I I I agree that. Okay. So so so I've been I've been thinking hard recently about this uh kind of spectrum of um of different kinds of uh different kinds of problem solving all the way from like very mechanical meticulous step by step you know this kind of thing to what we call flashes of insight. Uh you know great um great kinds of inspiration you know people who like the creatives who suddenly wow well the symphony was just sort of there. I didn't have to, you know, I didn't have to calculate it out and stuff like that.

And what I would say is this that on on Roger's claim that I think I think it makes sense that those are not the kinds of things what we mean by those things are not what happens when you follow the steps of an algorithm. But I'm very skeptical about this notion of machine at all because what we see even from extremely minimal fully deterministic kinds of systems and we have like we have one thing on the on the algorithms published and we have a bunch more stuff coming in the next few months. Even those kind of simple deterministic things are not only doing the things that the algorithm tells them to do.

Which means that if we if we define this kind of inspiration uh you know intuition whatever as the extra stuff that you get while you're yes obeying the laws of physics and the computation everything else you're obeying all that stuff but also some other things happen that are not captured by those by that formalism by the by the standard computation or formalism I I think that makes sense but then I would claim that you don't have to be human you don't have to be biological even ext and you don't even have to be very complex and and I don't know you know probably quantum I don't know anything about the, you know, quantum stuff. Maybe it gives you more bells and whistles and you can do more stuff, but but even boring Newtonian deterministic kinds of systems already have this kind of thing where it seems to get more than than you thought it was going to get from just following the steps. So, so I you know that that would be right now sitting where I am right now that would be the my claim is that is that yes we have access to uh some sort of intuitions that isn't captured by the standard computational paradigm but we're not unique in that and that seems to as far as I can tell go very far down if not all the way down. That's what I would say.

Um I wanted to just >> this feels like the the core is computational irreducibility right so you could say that like in a quantum right until you measure the thing there's no fundamentally no way that you can know what the outcome of the spin up or spin down will be uh but even without that right you have a complex automata until you have it run you have no way of knowing what it will be and you know you could do that without letting it run but then you'll have to like still run it internally so I feel like the sorts of examples that Mike is pointing at have that. Um so in my mind I used to I'm also kind of physicist by training but and I used to think that like but kind of let go of this idea that quantum is really fundamentally different than other things because we have other fundamental horizons in nature that are uh not only quantum that is right like if you knew the position and velocity of all molecules in the universe etc then you could predict things but you'd need the computer to do that and that computer would be the universe. So realistically like you couldn't really right >> but there is there is kind of a fundamental difference that I'm not really doing a very good job at um explaining because maybe I would have to go like much slower and so but you know I I think maybe this could be something that I could slowly put together in a clearer way but I mean uh let's say the gist of it would be that nothing of what you might think that it's like um really this extra thing like if you have something that looks deterministic and you say well even if all my steps are deterministic uh I'm still getting something out from that. Is that what you said uh Michael?

Uh well, what I said was that um what you what you apparently get in some of these simple systems are not just unpredictability and not just things that are hard to as Pavlo just said uh you know know ahead of time with finite resources. What I see is things that are fundamentally recognizable to behavior scientists. So these are these are beha these are um uh uh behavioral propensities. These are problem solving skills. these are specific patterns which to me that all of these things are on the same spectrum anyway. I think these are all the same things. Uh but I don't you know I don't think it's just being it's it's not just the fact that you couldn't predict it because in fact in our example I I think you could you could just no no one looked for it. You actually could predict it but it's not the predictability it's not the prediction aspect of it. It's the fact that these things do the kind of work that we expect agents to do. And we have um by the way I don't Carl I don't know if you remember but you made some um suggestions for us about how to look for active inference in that system and uh uh um Reed Bender and I have a manuscript that'll you know we're working on it that we actually we we found exactly what what you suggested we look for and and it's there and so we'll be we'll be writing it up. the you know these this is this is what I mean is that it just seems to me that the standard the standard computational paradigm that we use to to a say what are you going to get when you when you do certain things and b the inverse problem which is if I want to solve something how much effort do I need to put in to to make this happen like they don't they don't do the accounting properly they leave out something very important and I think at the lower end of the scale with these simple things these things are are measurable but they're kind of modest And then as you go to higher like biological systems and beyond they become more difficult to quantify but much much more impressive and you know pretty pretty close I think to what we mean by intuition and things like that.

>> Okay. Yeah. No I guess like the for me it's difficult to connect things right now because like I just popped in I one of my first meetings here. So uh but I guess just like the only thing that I uh is important I think it's like the distinction of like having probabilities that are um fundamental that come from quantum mechanics. No way that they are like outside our universe those those probabilities they're outside the physical universe. There's no way you can and all the others are apparent.

there's always something that uh you can do to to recover that and and that is really key to what Roger says and I think most well at least in the physics um um scenario most people miss that and it's really key but anyway I will listen more and [laughter] I think I yeah >> so sorry could you could you talk about that last bit again because I'm I'm really interested when you say they're outside and this is like I have no expertise in this but when when you say they're outside of our universe. What do you mean by that? And and um you know uh outside this universe, outside physics in general, like outside of what exactly? I'd love to hear.

>> Well, I mean I think this also like touches with um interpretations of quantum mechanics, right? It's like um we've been arguing about this for like 100 years, but let me maybe go into the key explanations. One of them would be many worlds. So in many worlds uh in one single branch you don't have any probabilities you don't have to worry about them. Um so everything would be like deterministic in one branch but you have to live with the fact that there are an infinite number of universes that do not interact with this one. So there would then in that sense be things outside this universe which would be other universes. I don't like that interpretation because I think it's like too too crazy. But let's say I'm going to try to simplify it. But other interpretations that would be more of the type of hidden variables for example that uh David Bomb for example put forward and Einstein also used to think that there must be something hidden and and so on. there like um some some interpretations of them are like things that you cannot measure with a physical apparatus by that I mean outside the universe you cannot uh use a photon or another atom or any other thing to measure that part of the system because it's just not physical in that sense ju >> just out of curiosity is that a pretty um con you know is that a conventional claim just because because uh I'm I'm just curious how how people take that because what I've noticed is that everybody's really allergic to other realms and when you say that something is outside of physics, people really tend to freak out and I'm just curious in your in your world.

>> Well, I mean I I think it just means like it it it Well, the thing is that interpretations of quantum mechanics, we've been for 100 years disagreeing. So you know um there is the many worlds caps and there's a epismal epis epistemologic camp that says that well quantum mechanics doesn't even talk about physics it just talks about information I mean there are that those extreme you know like uh camps the interpretations are that that difficult so of course if one says one thing you will always find many other people that are going to disagree But what I meant I this is what I am finding in my in my own research is that there are some variables involved in quantum mechanics that you cannot measure by physical means meaning I can't plug a apparatus to it. I can't use photos. I can't use other systems with mass because they just don't couple.

However, they give rise to these probabilities.

Um but you know many worlds people would completely disagree with that interpretation.

>> Well they got they got enough other realms. So so they can't they can't >> but there's yeah but but there's so something let me give you another example like a collapse models those collapse models say that there is a stochastic field which is universal and that sounds very nice which produces the collapse. What what does stochastic mean? Stoastic means is a field of probabilities.

But these probabilities again are fundamental.

You know, it's like the the notion of probability means that there is something missing in your description.

I think maybe that would be like the the clearest way to saying every time you have a stochastic field or a probability or something like that that we cannot get rid of in quantum mechanics unless we go to many worlds. All the other interpretations of quantum mechanics would require something to be stoastic, probabilistic and so on. Probability means you do not have information. But there is a huge difference between not having information because there are too many degrees of freedom and your computer can't cope or you don't um have an apparatus that in principle that there are actually just no nothing you can do in the physical world to recover the information that's missing.

I mean, not even a not even a black hole is like that because in a black hole, you could decide to fall into the black hole and you would find the missing information in there. So, it's even worse than a black hole and and is there.

>> Sorry. Would somebody else want to say something?

>> No, you go ahead. I I wait for a second.

>> Okay. So, sorry. Just just one last thing. Um, so, so if that's the case, is there anything in physics that prohibits there being some kind of structure to this? So, so we've said that these probabilities are some somehow outside of this world. Fine. But wherever it is that they originate, is it possible that there's some some large scale structure such that what looks to us in in experiments is is random, but but overall there's some kind of underlying, you know, pattern to how these things show up. Is or or are there aspects of physics that actually rule that out?

like you you know observationally that can't be right. No, you I mean the patterns I don't know if I'm understanding your question well, but the patterns are very strong in the sense that if you use quantum mechanics to predict the outcome of an experiment, you will get I don't know an accuracy much better than anything else. That's why we keep quantum mechanics uh because it's just incredibly powerful. But what we do is that we use something called the born rule that we just say okay so suddenly these states which have some coefficients they turn into probabilities it's magical you know right now that's how we live with quantum mechanics I teach quantum mechanics at the university and you have to tell students this is the state of the system this is a shreddinger equation that tells you in a deterministic way how the system evolves and then out of my sleeve I have to put forward Borne's rule which is the measurement postulate and say that the state collapses to one of the outcomes with a given probability but there's been for 100 years no explanations of where the probabilities come from but the only thing we do understand I think any physicist would agree is that probabilities mean something is missing in the information.

So I guess uh I loosely loosely speaking I said it's out of this [laughter] it's out of it because it's fundamental.

It's not because of our lack of knowledge. I I guess what I'd like to ask is whether the probabilities you're talking about you're thinking of you said missing information that to me suggests that probability is epistemological that if you just had more information you would be able to you know find the answer this probabil you know reduce your uncertainty and but there are people I think there are some interpretations of quantum mechanics that say no probability is metaphysical It's just part of the structure of the universe.

Things are just really at this fundamental level probabilistic and we need to just get over it. Um, >> yeah, >> that's one way of looking at it.

>> Well, you just mentioned two. You just mentioned two interpretations, right?

One of them would be that one and the other one would say quantum mechanics doesn't talk about the physical world just talks about um information or you know like um our our state of knowledge of the physical world and and things like that. U but in all in all cases you you have to deal with um uh something is missing.

Carl um I think you were next.

Sorry, I was just have a sneaky cigarette.

Yeah. Um, just one thing. I was also at the How the Light Gets In um and um just out of interest uh had a a fireside chat with Hillary Lawson who's the director of the IA I AI um and told him about you uh you you generically >> Yes. Yes. So I I was in a debate with him. Yeah. And I went to your debate well or discussion with him which I loved by the way. It was really amazing.

>> So So he was he was sort of shopping around for the next likely set of you know generation of speakers in this space. So uh hope hopefully he said his secretary was going to going to email me with a list of links and the like because the things you're talking about here are exactly what they like to hear about.

>> Yes.

>> At these festivals. Um so sorry the um just something that might um tie together the um the missing information perspective and probability and the first um scale invariant or looking for invariances or symmetries at multiple scales. though. Um, one response as a physicist um with very little training and my training was a year of quantum um uh mechanics and a year of probability theory um is that it's all about probability. There is no reality. Um and on that view information is just an attribute of a probability density. In fact, literally the self-information in in um in Shannon and information theory generically is it's the negative log of a probability. It is a functional. It it doesn't there is nothing apart from probability. Um and information just is a statement or an attribute of a probability distribution [sighs] and that seems to me to make sense in relation to the derivation of the at least the time independence equation from the fauunk equation. And then you ask yourself what is a fauunk equation? It's just the deterministic behavior of probability densities. So what I'm saying is, you know, I agree entirely with with a vet that, you know, it's all about probabilities. Um, but I would say beyond the quantum realm, uh, you know, in my world, um, the born room is unnecessary because you just say all physics is measurement and it's all measurement, all measurement is inference and all inference is just making a probistic uh, commitment. Um and as such you could describe all physics, classical physics, um statistical physics, mechanics, quantum mechanics as a statement about the density dynamics. And if you follow that route, you can quite easily derive this currently a wave equation from uh you just by taking the complex roots of a probability distribution over the things that have the missing information. But you know, so if you pursue that perspective, I think that um you can gracefully connect this notion of the weak and strong perception. I've just read the abstract of the paper that that was circulated um and it does strike me that they were wanting to talk about synchronization and certainly um have a nod to dynamical systems theory. But what kind of dynamical systems theory?

And my guess is yes, it is certainly interesting to talk about deterministic chaos and generalize synchrony in the context of deterministic systems, but the real world application is actually in the probabistic space of stochastic chaos. Um and then you I think you're in the world then of talking about the alignment um that Benjamin was talking about in terms of synchronization in generalized synchrony in the context of stochastic chaos which is just written in terms of the density dynamics. So I I think that there is a way of sort of um joining the dots and licensing um and licensing the the notion that it's it's all about probability uh dynamics um all the way up and all the way down.

And I say that because the Penroian like arguments I think are slightly misguided um in the sense that listening to the conversation it seems to me that the computation is read in the sense of universal computation on um infinitely precise Turing machines with infinite memory. And then you can get into all the arguments of Kamarov complexity and solar induction and universal computation. Um, and that may be apt for von human architectures, but that's not the kind of mortal computation which we're dealing with. We're dealing with >> but I don't I don't think that that's necessary. Like Roger's argument is quite like uh simplistic in a in a way.

But we do agree that everything are probabilities that but are are you like if I understood you well you're saying that in these interpretations of quantum mechanics where you're saying well everything is just about information in a way it's saying there's no physics there's just information um um I mean you you resolve some problems of course by getting rid of the like of the physical world um But still I mean I I don't think about the physical world I guess in the traditional way you know I have kind of a bit more out there ideas but I do I am interested in sort of trying to find ways in which like the mental world and the physical world might couple you know in in the sense that maybe if you say uh from an idealistic point of view let's say if you if you if you want you could still find the problem of explaining what are the internal states with respect to the states that you think you perceive outside. You know, and a a super interesting problem was not not resolved yet.

>> Can I just finish by asking you a question? Could you pretend to be Carlo Relli and then comment upon what you've just said? If [laughter] >> No, >> no, you can't.

>> I can't pretend to be Carlo Relli.

>> Right. I go back to my cigarette then and listen to the next question.

[laughter] >> No, because you know what? I I have um not had discussions along these topics with Carlo and also um well work-wise Carlo has this loop quantum gravity approach which I don't think is um I mean you know with all respect to Carlo I don't think is correct you know so I think I I disagree with Carlo in in in some um you know approaches on how to contise gravity and things like that and I know a lot more about that side of his work and much less about um other other of his ideas would be very interesting to see what he says about these things. I mean right now I I speak with a lot of caution but I am about to publish a paper that um I think it it's quite well at least for me it's a breakthrough in understanding where the probabilities come from uh because it's like really concrete and so on but there are some fields there and um that you cannot measure with what we would call atoms and so on and my curiosity is to find doubts if they could be then related to something more like mental state.

>> Not prejudicing your conclusions, but where do the probabilities come from? I know it's not published. What's the conclusion?

>> Sorry, >> you you swear that where do the probabilities come from? You said you had a concrete answer from your paper. I just I'm sorry I'm getting ahead of you publishing it, but do you can you give you teased us, so it' be interesting to hear where you think they come from?

Well, I I find so so what what I'm doing is I I am including gravity but in a way different to what other people have been doing so far. I mean to start with people say you have a mass that curves spacetime and what they try to do is they try to quantise >> spacetime and I'm going to come up quite like a different point of view quite strong I think and say no if you have a mass in one position it curves spacetime but the spaceime is GR is classical when you get like a quantum version of gravity is when you put the the the the mass in a superposition of left and right then you have only then you have quantum gravity and and so on. So in order to to do that I well I mean I have to uh construct things in a way that I recover uh gravity on one hand and quantum mechanics in the other and right now it's looking very good. I mean, I'm really almost like um uh I do I didn't answer your question. I know. [laughter] Um but well, in in in in doing that, I I in order to get quantum mechanics right and so on, I have to postulate the existence of um on some on on some fields and uh you cannot measure them.

I I wanted to sort of think about um your sort of framing on probabilities when you talk about probability and look I'm I'm not a physicist. I'm very very far from a physicist. But when I think about it philosophically and I think about it through time, when you talk about the space of probabilities where you've got an unknown amount of hidden information, do you just have a space of everything and then the measurer or the observer that's constraining that space given they they clearly are finite? So anything that's taking a measure of those fields or that underlying probability space has some optimization built into it because it's finite.

Particularly here because our models are built computationally or at least passible to us computationally when we talk about them compose sentences to discuss them that imposes like an ordering on that space and you know to me you know everything at root might be this field but the stratifications we're giving it are like orders of efficiency like when we do physics or at least my sort of metaphysical read of it is we're taking lots of observ ations and physics is just the stuff that is the most predictable like we have reduced this to the most computationally efficient representation that lets us output a model of reality that's useful for us to you know gather more information we have figured out shortcuts we have discovered symmetries when symmetries here if I have a symmetry I don't need to use as much computation and so working through it you start with like this space of many worlds or you know to space and you have selection at the most fundamental level like I think evolution goes all the way back to those sorts of discussions where you you have some observer imposing constraints and it's really where you draw the line at the at an observer in the computational formalism that Wolram has you have this idea of every rule being composed in this space and unions are very simple rules right it's a finite lookup that combines an observer together so if you take the state of the universe at you know the moment we get a you know stable particle right? Like we have an atom or something at that point the union of all of that is that computing on that substrate and it's just outputting whatever's a fixed or close to fixed representation and you know some of that has coupling so they bounce off each other but you know they do do at least do things that we can describe computationally like they you know an atom will emit an electron or have a dipole moment or something like that. Now this is you know getting head over skis with my uh very limited compared to discrete physics knowledge.

But if you have selection can't you just impose that sort of structure on that space and therefore those probabilities become less problematic because it's just an order of description. It's the level of description that's most useful to effectively find computational reducibility for that observer to continue to build and complexify their model and then have more degrees of freedom as they move through sort of time or state update or measurements.

>> Well, that that's also an open question if I'm understanding you right. Um if you look at many worlds that's assuming that quantum mechanics applies universally to all scales from the microscopic world to the cosmic scales.

You would say quantum mechanics applies to all scales and that sounds very nice because we have like a universal sort of theory. Again, you have to live with the fact that you have an infinite number of use. One is uh smoking and the other not and you know all of these things which I really >> I'm more saying that you throw I'm more saying that like many worlds gets narrowed to one world like we have this big funnel and that we chuck away all of the other worlds. So they're explanatory explanatorily useless until you maybe we make a quantum computer that someone figures out is sampling one of those other branches to get its compute power to solve these very hard algorithms.

>> But if you if you get rid of all the other branches, you have classical physics.

>> It's what we it's what we observe.

>> There is a [laughter] >> yes but but we do observe lasers and lasers wouldn't work without quantum theory. No, but but that's the the thing of the scale is a big thing, right? And that's one of the things about like uh when you put in gravity that could give you the scale because that could give you um a mass at which you would get uh the the the classical world emerging from the quantum world and that would explain why we can build lasers. But we can also explain why you don't see me in two places at the same time.

There is actually a a theory called quantum Darwinism that is kind of pointing at what you Sam are talking about and it's a bit weird but my favorite one is relational quantum mechanics also from Carlo and to to me yeah to me that's that's sort of the one I personally like the most >> uh it foregrounds relationality of things and so this is what I want to also um uh talk about now or like say is I'm trying to again like connect all these threads that we've been discussing and Um it seems like one that that's thing that stands out to me among all these is a matter of perspective right that a lot of these questions really depend on what how you cut the universe up into the observer and the observed right so it's about relationality right that the thing that we ultimately know is true like I don't know if I exist I don't know if the universe exists but I know that I'm having an experience and know that there is an interaction between a mind and a world and a and a matter right uh and those relations are to to me like the most reliable onlogical reality to to start with. So uh for me kind of relational ontology is a starting point and and so I feel like this kind of comes into a lot of these threads for example we were talking earlier about uh internal model versus kind of I am the model and I'm just a fish responding to current right and to me that also seems like a matter of perspective of well if I isolate my brain as okay this is me and this is inside right now that thing can have an internal model that mediates my actions whereas if I don't isolate it and this all thing is just a sort of part of the environment then it's just there's a stimulus and a response and it's just happening kind of right so it almost seems like a matter of measurement right similarly um I guess what Mike was talking about with the sorting algorithms and these like simple algorithms that seem to exa exhibit agentic behavior or even something like active inference uh right it also seems like okay some things might be simple but they might look agentic depending on who's looking right depending on what you're looking for right uh in sort of perception of agency like cognitive science research where they try to see like what do things uh what do people consider agentic or not like one of the best things to do is you put googly eyes on almost anything and the kids will necessarily start recognizing that as agentic as opposed to not right so it really depends on the the perceiver whether this is an agent or not in some sense right and uh uh I guess for me I I almost kind of want to push back on thing that in physics we sort of I feel like it's an implicit assumption that we start with often is this that there is such a thing as a view from nowhere that there is such a thing as observer independent universe that is just there anyway right and uh it seems like what a lot of the people also what we're saying or how I'm hearing what they're saying is that well but wait a second right like we are a subject of evolution part of this universe etc and that's our perspective it's it's very relative and so sort of questioning the the validity of like yeah the a view from nowhere doesn't exist but it's not just well oh that's inconvenient but no it's like ontologically non-existent like there is a fundamental barrier to like there is no such thing as a view from nowhere right uh any view will be mediated by it's kind of like the thing in itself right does my like water bottle exist in itself if I'm not watching it right uh and that it's always mediated by the observer and the observer quantum mechanics also confusing.

>> Um, >> so I'm going to like probability as an optimal description.

>> Yeah. So, sorry I'm going to have to go because I have like a group meeting and there my students are already like there and calling but just just to finish like with with that and I'm sorry you have to leave early. Um uh but just to comment to what you were saying is that um there's of course like the relational that's yet another interpretation and so on and something that is like fascinating I find about quantum mechanics is that with classical physics we thought okay the observer and the observed are definitely separated and one doesn't affect the other and then quantum mechanics comes in and you know shows us that this separation is um not that clearcut and that's what I find really fascinating about the whole thing and then different interpretations deal with this observer observed thing in a very different way and the funny thing about Rogers is that uh if you say gravity collapses the wave function that's a way of getting rid of the observer and then comes Roger to say yes but you know that's where like from from this collapse that's where you get that's Roger's theory I'm just explaining what he says like uh the consciousness and and mental states. So in a way he tried to get rid of the observer but then he actually said no actually this is the essence of the observer in one way right. So I think what's clear is that you cannot separate them. But now we have all these different proposals for 100 years. The more time passes, the more interpretations we come we have. And at some point um the question is how do we decide which one you know and well I I think u um experiments are are are a good way to to at least have a way to choose. Um, like if you invent a laser and the laser makes a hole in the hand, well, maybe there's something. Now I'm thinking about uh Carl about Hillary because Hillary probably saying, "Ah, there's nothing out there, [laughter] you know, and so on." But um, well, I I at least in my case, I'm proposing an experiment um with my work that's like very clear-cut that would allow to see if that's the right perspective or or not.

But what I find exciting about it is to sort of recognize in my work that is something there that is not let's say physical in a sense that you can measure it with a physical system with an atom with a photon with anything of that sort.

But yeah, um well, I hope next time I don't have to I I do have to leave early or maybe I what I'll do is that I'll I'll I'll connect there and if I can I come back.

>> Thank you.

>> Yep, that's fine. Thanks very much. See you next time.

>> I [clears throat] had a bit of a question related to the quantum mechanics and etc. things is if there is anything there that would account for the type of coupling that I've noticed um not only in like dance you know where you get you know sort of synchronized to a beat or something like that but it seems often I've observed this sematically in multiple occasions including in things like uh partner dance or making love or something where you actually get caught up in the teological movement of a particular piece of music um incl seems particularly prominent for me for something that has like symphonic notes but they they have a sort of embedded teiology already, but you also begin to sort of anticipate what the music is doing. And so your sort of creative process, so to speak, is sort of tied towards that. Um, I I see it most obviously observable in sort of dance and movement exercises, but I don't know of any particular mechanism that would explain for that or any any theory that takes that into account.

guess open question for the quantum knowledgeable people but >> I think I didn't quite get the question I'm curious if you could >> um yeah so what I observe um is that in times when you people are dancing that you know there's a synchronization that happens particularly with more advanced uh dancers to a particular piece of music um and the most obviously observable version of that is to the beat of the music so you have a drum beat and you're sort synchronizing to that beat and you sort of start to anticipate but that beat can change and there can be multiple poly rhythms or things like that that come in um and more broadly I've observed it's also possible to synchronize to the the teiology of the music meaning the sort of way that it develops and progresses over time there could be changes in tempo there be various progressions but that somehow in the expression of this and I think partner dance is one version of that group dance is another version I would say making love is also a sort version of that, you can actually sort of embody the symphony, so to speak. Um, but you do so from a non-cognitive and often anticipatory state. And I I don't know of any mechanism that properly explains that. Um, but it does seem to exist and it at least seems to tie to these other concepts of when the um the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, so to speak.

It looks like Carl maybe has something to say about it. So, >> yes, I do. [clears throat and cough] >> Yes. Um yeah, that's a great question and it reminds me very much of the um the focus of something called Herb Academy, an autumn academy in German in Switzerland that was co-organized by chap called Wolf Wolf Gang Shaka in conjunction with Herman Haken of Synergetics fame. Um, and it was a delight. I I I suspect it's stopped a few years ago since CO, but every year they'd have one in German and one in English. And it was exactly to drill down on the physics of that kind of synchronization and alignment you get in dance and song. So they'd have Herman Hagen introducing laser physics and Lindberg Gandow um maths and then they'd have a dance therapist come on and show videos of of your dance therapy. Um trying to bring together the physics of this kind of of synchronization. U so you know there is a literature out there on exactly this. I've actually participated in that literature. There's a paper written by Chris Fri called a duet for one and it just basically shows that you can get this kind of alignment with this deep temporal structure which is to a certain extent scale free in time. So that you know as with singing and dancing and music there are there are there is structure at a number of different scales and this is an immersion property of just putting two things trying to measure each other or infer each other and if they um are trying to predict and infer and measure each other then they are going to think themselves successful if they're mutually predictable and then they converge on technically a synchronization manifold which I I'm using this language because of Benjamin's initial um presentation that you know I think that finding that bottleneck is mathematically collapsing in the joint space of two dancers onto that synchronization manifold that has much fewer degrees of freedom and then you are now tracing out orbits on that synchronization manifold.

Um and and that that that that's if you like the steady state solution that's that's that's a sort of you know the the most stable or free energy minimizing uh minimizing solution. So I think there there is a you know an easy route to answer that kind of question from the point of view of the physics of self-organization that appeals to again generalized synch synchronization of chaos. The interesting thing um then uh emerges which speaks to another theme which which we mentioned earlier on is [clears throat] the you've talked about the teology um and I imagine by which you mean that the the time constants and the orbits on the synchronization manifold on the on the bottleneck um if you like um are set by the the the physical teology of our bodies. So that you know the rhythms of music are not dissimilar from from some of the more important bio- rhythms like heartbeats and respiration and the like and in particular those kinds of rhythmic behaviors that we witness in each other.

So if we're co-constructing a um uh a sensorium that then can be measured or observed uh so that the observer is observing the obser the observer and so on infin item um then it is quite natural that the natural synchrony that would emerge would be that which is constrained you in Benjamin's notion of sort of boundary conditions um um by the um by [clears throat] the kinetics and the physics of the of the of the of the things that are that are acting [clears throat] out this dance and this singing from the same the same uh the same hymn sheet. I don't know if that if that helps but you know from the point of view of um laser physics for example and the synergetics of the Herman Haken sword uh where you get the notions of uh for example the slaving principle um which speaks to the sort of coupling between the scales that we were talking about before um this kind of explan the the kind of um alignment and synchronization that you were talking about um is the only possible outcome um uh for two loosely coupled uh systems that goes all the way back to to to dawn in in in Nyme Megan in the sense of um you know clocks coming to oscillate in um in synchrony if they're hang if they're loosely coupled or can see each other through a you know a common wall or or or a common beam.

>> If I'm not mistaken it sort of implies maybe even some version becomes definitive that the music itself has some sort of onlogical status that can be defined. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I people people in Montreal have sort of written about this um at a slightly more abstract level in terms of um variational niche construction. So that's the other point that came up before this sort of this sort of circular causality that you get as you commit closer and closer to radical inactivism. I don't but people do and I I did get a slight sense of a touch of radical inactivism um in her but you if you take it to to its limit that's absolutely the case and and when applied to this um dance between the inside uh and the outside the rest of the universe where the rest of the universe now becomes another dancer um then you naturally induce a symmetry. So the environment that you're co-constructing with your con specifics is now in exactly the same way you are trying to measure it. It is trying to measure you and it learns from you and it does have its own ontological uh status. So my favorite argument here is the notion of a desire path or an elephant path. This is when you walk over a grass verge.

Take a shortcut to your favorite cafe.

Then that's the environment learning about the things that occupy the the agents or the con specifics the phenotypes that occupy the environment.

And crucially it leaves a track. It leaves some there's a semiotics to it.

Uh deontic cues is some jargon often used that means that okay I see this path worn through the grass. That means that things like me should go down there. And therefore, you can now start to talk about the environment, the universe, learning about all the um the denisonens or things that that that constitute that universe. And then you're you're the environment and the niche, the niche and the agent are then co-constructing together learning learning about about each other. So certainly and you can extend this to culture you know so books language um these are all things that have >> is there something there that would clarify you know the nature of space in a sense because if you have two things that have discrete you know properties that are then coming into some sort of coupling presumably I mean kind of observationally there's times where they couple well and times where they don't couple well or they don't couple at all and I think Mike let in with this concept of like these people who are seeing the music and they're just writing it down and they sort of have a a direct more or less relationship.

Maybe Beethoven being a good example of that, you know, is there is there some sort of concrete explanation for why that would happen in some circumstances as opposed to others? That is I guess that's a physics question ultimately.

I mean there's a there's a there's a whole huge um literature on anomalous cases of this kind of thing whether it be sants with minimal you know brain volume or severe defects in certain cases that are able to do specific things right or um [clears throat] I think uh Treffort I think had this had this amazing book on um you know these examples of uh you know people who would like you know twins would just spew um prime numbers back and forth to each other having had no like no real education in math or anything like that.

Um and uh yeah and and cases everything from like Rammenujan down to the various various other people who like get these sort of downloads of specific stuff. Yeah. So, so there's a there's a big literature of examples, but I don't think I don't think there are any uh there's been any progress on like necessary and sufficient conditions for when it happens or how. But people do have of course techniques or everybody has their own favorite techniques for facilitating that. And when you talk to these people, uh they often have uh you know individualized tools that they use to uh to to facilitate that kind of thing if they want it. There's also negative versions where people get it and they don't want it and they try to suppress it.

When I think about things like that, I think it's around observational access.

The model that I work with is rule constraint based where you sort of stratify or your your modeled observer stratifies information way constraint. I give quite an anthropomorphic example but you can apply it you know to any domain structure as long as the domains are stratified by you know a different different cardalities of rules that have to be sampled on and off for that state to make for that space to make sense. So when you're sort of intuiting you know a whole or a gestal understanding the typical methods you know things that are studied quite heavily like meditation you know psychedelics prayer these are all different methods of trying to capture some larger space with focused attention where you're sort of narrowing to a basin or a gradient within sort of possibility space and then going and that and you think that gradient is useful and with that focus you can explore more basins and so you get a bigger space from that sort of focused effort and sampling. It's like akin to the sort of next thing is when you when that thing turns on and you get that insight you can loop around it very with you know low resistance or low low information entropy it's like I think what we call flow and so those things I think work together I think that you get that sort of intuitive insight as you focus down to one specific point and then the job is taking that point and then expanding it out and sort of looping around it but you have to try that's that ellic drive of that sort of thing. It has to be going for something to even do that. And so tools that have been used for thousands of years, you know, ritual coming of age ceremonies, they're all about expanding the state space for that individual observer, often bound to coupling or, you know, communal communal um communal communal uh Sam, I think we're not getting your audio now. Seem to glitch out.

Just just to point out while he's reconnecting that that that there is a literature on rituals that play exactly that teological role of putting a common ground out there that we can all share that may have some sort of onlogical aspect to it.

>> Is the word synchronization manifold ever used in that literature or is that something that would have a measurable possibility from you know how well a particular ritual enhanced that or something? Yeah. Um I don't know about the particular sort of legit I'm thinking of people at Montreal University in McGill who are particularly interested in this sort of cultural understanding the mechanics of cultural uh um self-organization um uh but certainly that literature um on dynamical systems approaches to dance and uh and dianic interactions. So the particular focus of Wolf Gang Shaka was actually be to be able to measure the generalized synchronization in therapeutic datic interactions between the therapist and the doctor just using um your simple um you know um video cameras or audio recordings and doing time frequency analysis or anything that you could get as a handle on the behavior of these two dynamical systems.

Then you try to measure the generalized synchrony to see whether you can predict how engaged if you like the patient was with the therapist or vice versa as a predictor of therapeutic outcome. So yeah and there are a number of different ways of of of measuring generalized synchrony.

>> I I don't know if this is like helpful Joel for you but there's a music video that came out like a month ago that is doing this with dance. There's a very famous choreographer a French group called Generation 8 and they do these very complex like they're they're not just like classical dance where everyone is doing the same thing.

they're moving as a sort of unit and the impact is that you see outside as when when synchronicity sort of the idea is that there's a small world network dynamic and you see it as individuals until there's some bifurcation point and it's an exponent jump and you're suddenly seeing it as a whole and after and those sort of exponentializations like there's this coupling point this critical point and after that we see it as a whole and I think that's partially based on our own computational bound foundness as to how we draw those cuts.

But it's something that you recognize not just in people like when you see dancing, it's a flock of birds doing it is is a sort of other version of that sort of dynamic where certain nodes in that network drive the whole network.

They val, you know, they like they pick the rule, they validate the rule that the other the rest of the network is doing and then the whole network just follows it because it propagates so fast within it. And that to me is like a sort of more network-based view of that synchronicity where you can start think again I you know when when when I when my modeling substrates a big computer everything I see can be made computational but I think that's sort of a tractable way to describe what's going on and you know I can I can share it with you. I'll share the link because I think it'll be quite it's quite interesting because it was the first time I've seen one of these videos for a while.

>> You're referring to I think is a the Finnish rapper as well or something.

>> Yeah, this is the Finnish rapper. Yeah, exactly.

There's a some more formal work that that reminds me of um by Scott Kelso um who is famous for studying syncupation and synchronization in rhythmic um usually finger movements and in the past decade he's turned his attention to small group dynamics in exactly the way that Sam was describing. So ju just to join the dots here in terms of the intellectual legacy Scott Kelso did a research fellowship with Herman Haken um many many years ago and that's where he got the you know the rhetoric and the jargon to then subsequently um popularize the notion of dynamical systems in understanding rhythmic coordination and his particular focus was exactly that that bifocation um that um takes you from synchronized behavior to syncopated behavior. If you drive the system through with an order parameter, say the frequency of of um regular finger movements as as as you try to replicate um the other person's finger movements and the frequency increases, you now can no longer synchronize, you now bifocate and you syncopate and that has some really interesting extensions in the group. So I think Scott had a PNS paper on this you know within the past three years um extending his particular interpretation of um generalized synchrony um to a group or small world small world context in PNAS >> you could you could even take this like to the scope of you know if it's self similar all the way up and all the way down you can take it to the scope of you know in you know all of humanity or a country or a society and you can go well what are the dynamics well you know when at least when I think of evolution I think of two core dynamics of exploit and explore and things that don't change are fully exploited they are in equilibrium that's done humanity if you think of us as a whole we're sort of a fuzzy outline that's quite chaotic and then there's a bunch of exploit stuff going on to map that space and keep it stable in the middle and for me different philosophical systems that we you know either invent or they ingress on us depending on you know where you think whether you think they're top down or bottom up. Those systems are effectively coordination mechanics to balance out those dynamics for high complexity observers that can't reduce the exploit explore dynamic to a simple dynamical equation or you know like there's much more many more degrees of freedom and maintaining degrees of freedom is optimal for exp is optimal to find to discover more of the space because you have more possible choices.

Therefore, you've got this really, you know, you know, Carl's dynamic P dynamic steady state equilibrium where it's sort of bouncing up and down around a midpoint and over time as that system matures it will bounce less and less but it will still always bounce because there's always a non-zero noise component because we have you know probability space underneath us right so I think all of these dynamics are not just observer dynamics or at least the loop that observers are proposed is to run is should be universal for anything you count as an observer. And the manifestation of those dynamics and results should you know should be self- similar.

But it's hard to tell because the jump because that you have this sort of linear exponential linear or asmtotic approach dynamic which makes it hard to look down and recognize the system below you as doing a similar or the same thing with you know infinitely less or very high finite number less total computational power. And so that that to me is like when we think about sort of platonic space and we think about coupling and interactions when we think about ideas and how they ingress and this is going back to the point that Ben made earlier. You know my I tend to have the view that these these things are co-created. There's a set of them that have already been fully reduced by simple computation by simpler things than us. And there are bigger ideas that sort of live in this space that we embed by sampling and they mature and get bigger and then they limit possibility space and the dynamics of societies I think you very lossily be reduced to the dynamics of those systems interacting at a macro scale and at a micro scale individually you still form part of lots and lots of different superructures but what you which superructures you actually have agency over to control or drive. Well, you know, you can move your body. You may Carl may be able to move all of neuroscience, like Mike might be able to move all of biology, but most people will be in the exploit part of that system, making sure that the people on the edge of that system are doing things properly and validating, you know, the new rules they discover that unlock new choices or new things. And so you see these I think you can build a model of observation that can cover that whole space albe it badly but I think it's I think it's like the way I think it's the way to start thinking about processor orient process dynamics as opposed to object dynamics which I think the thinking about sort of spaces is like the easiest thing to do when it's very hard to say what these things actually are but you can tell you can figure out what they do and then hopefully you get to a better answer for what they are by their properties that you're finding out.

>> Yeah. One >> go ahead.

>> Yeah. I just wanted to pose a question, but maybe you can about just to what extent do you guys think all of these things that we're discussing are a function of basically where you draw the boundary of the self versus universe, right? Because like if the universe is learning about us as we're learning about it basically like where you put that mark of blanket right and it's almost like you take any random chaotic system and draw some arbitrary boundary in it and that puts a perspective where all of a sudden we have an agent that right like has these or I mean of course not any buts a wide variety and then from that stand we get all this ingression of platonic form things like that.

the the you know direct perception strong perception ideas of ecological psychology are that you don't really draw the boundary because rather than having like an organ it's basically very sort of anti-dualist perspective where instead of having like the organism and the environment as these separate systems perception cognition and action and the ecological view are able to happen precisely because the organism and the environment coupled together as like uh organized elements of of a single larger system.

And then to bring in a little bit of Mike's terminology, what the agent then ends up becoming, the boundaries are its cognitive light cone, sort of the range over which it can perpetuate some agentic dynamics and anything outside of that. Yeah. So, it's really all about the the sort of agency and ability to fulfill a plan that ends up determining the boundaries. And basically anytime an organism is coupling to its environment, it's forming a collective intelligence with it to some degree to perpetuate whatever dynamics it needs to do.

There's a a preprint that discusses this a little bit that I'll share um with me and and Mike and also Leo Pio Lopez in his lab is super smart. Um so it doesn't go into that specific question in a ton of detail, but does talk about cognitive light cones as the the boundaries of agencies. You might find that interesting.

Yeah, I guess I was thinking more of right that perhaps even right like a dancer being part of the or the group collectively becoming a single unit or all this right like to what extent are all these questions kind of functions of this arbitrary divide. of what is a self and what is a not self, right? Yeah, I think I think that's actually I think that's a fair point and I think that ultimately you kind of have to start with well unless you sort of David Charas you have to start with your own sort of self-experience as the most real thing to you because you are having this first person experience and then you go well here's a boundary and I put boundaries around objects constantly my cup and my water where you draw those and whether you draw a boundary there are people that you know you go oh you know I've talking to a ghost, they've boundaried, you know, set of a set of air molecules and said this is an this is an object. Whether or not you believe them, that's coupling, right? And so if enough people cover on an object and people will throw in validation because if you're proposing something extreme, you will go and get caught by the rest of the network because it's computationally expensive for the network for the whole network to couple to this novel object which only you can see with your sort of your sort of specific cognitive light cone. And if that object over many many validation turns is discovered by many many observers to be more computationally efficient then that's that object is actually lots and lots of air molecules then that's this is like the co-creation this and co-creation and upward and downward you have the sort of some imposition from a macro scale observer this is like you also see this in Eric Coil's work you have some macroscale description that has causal power >> and then that bounds the sort of upward feedback from the network that says oh that's real that's not real >> and so over time you you get those bound those boundaries are sort of competitive like like idea you know the idea you know the simple phrase is like ideas are evolutionary they fight so when we make even make an abstract idea this is literally you know what what atheism and theists do they constantly fight about which idea is more stable and sticky and the these things can be applied I think up and down scales but where you take the cut I think comes from and the fact that we're human sized and we have this firsthand sort of conscious experience that you know, okay, you can think you're a zombie, but it's probably not super helpful for you. Um, and that gives you the sort of grounding for all the other objectifications that you do as part of that process.

>> Yeah. But then there's ritual, right, which which then create these entities that are kind of collectively humanized, right? through ritual we couple into the super organism and now >> religion right you get and now like this god becomes >> that way >> the evolution of religion that way we have you know animism it's you know this the bodhic tree is the is the tree of everything then we go to oh it's actually the mountain bit bit bigger you know more you know pe I think humans when they do these sort of ritualistic objectifications of things we tend to like big things like you know things tend to get bigger And I think it's because you don't just have when you when you make an observation, you don't just look at what you can currently see. You make projections. So you have to in your internal model, you have sort of two levels of it. You have your current sort of cognitive light cone of what your current computational power says. I can roughly predict this. And then you have an imagination. You go, oh, I think the limit is here. And this is the biggest thing I can aim for. Like this is my tell it go. This is the thing with the most structured information. And in religion that manifests as you know the ultimate ground and you have it across every persistent religion you know even though each religion has infinitely many different schools and different nuances the kind of base idea is you know there is some fundamental one thing or no thing if you're a Buddhist but you know conceptually it's like you know the similar it rhymes it doesn't it doesn't it doesn't quite uh it doesn't quite um it's not quite the same but to survive those things have had you know been embedded as the hugest objects that we can imagine right especially the difference is the difference between transcendence imminence right you know you get to imminence and you go oh well I've got everything that can possibly happen here and then someone comes along and goes actually no I've got something that's even bigger it's not even a concept I can't even you can't even describe it it's unending and so therefore I have the maximum I have an unending size of my possibility space. That must be have more utility for me in sort of the long run or or it wouldn't happen so many times across the world in all these different contexts across thousands of years. And so these sorts of rituals are like ways of embedding that where people are getting something from getting some utility from that bigger model. And that that I think is sort of a theory of dynamics of like the interface as opposed to reality, but the interface might be getting something from it that's useful for it. And so other this is sort of my strong view is that when we when evolution is predominantly anformational or anformational phenomenon, I think survival is downstream of it. I think survival is what things do so that they can keep doing theformational thing. they can keep sort of structuring space or structuring this possibility space up.

>> Could I just point out that the the ultimate religion that succumbs to that argument which I concur with exactly is actually mathematics that that that's that's the one that is most universally um endorsed in a co-evolutionary evo kind of kind kind of sense.

>> I mean >> it's just a story that makes sense. So your use the word bigness I was reading as inclusive or expansive whilst at the same time as simple as possible.

>> Yeah. It has to be easy otherwise no like think about like if you think about it computationally when you have like you know I'm I'm leaning on much more much more talented people at ma mathematicians than me. But when I think about like computational possibility space, one of the I think neat things within sort of really formalism is it's a closed groupoid, right? It's an infinite group. There is a closure point and that imports geometry and physics.

And you know, whether or not you think that's the onlogical ground or whether you think it's just the interface or the biggest space to model the interface, that closure point has usefulness, right? It enables that model to take this really big thing and within simple steps one it says everything in that model connects to it by one morphism one choice one jump and so it's instantly if you've got the communication channel right it's instantly easy for people to put into their world model which is the innovation of Christianity right you had you had Judaism which was like this transcendent transcendent god it's too far you can't touch it don't don't you know my monities don't it's you don't don't think you know anything about it just do it and then Christianity Christian and that's been baked into rabbitical Torah for thousands of years but you get to Christianity and Christianity is like no you can mediate through this thing Jesus Christ it's a real thing here that that that single jump you couldn't see it was too hard to compute here's G here's Jesus just touch him and you okay you you'll touch him and he's composed of this point actually this point infinity is actually a trinity It's actually three things. So don't worry about it being separate. It's actually the same. Don't don't worry about it. And so these are the sort of jumps these systems make to compete, right? They they they compete because [clears throat] for observers like us, they have utility. It's just it's clear otherwise they wouldn't stick around.

Ideas that fail, ideas that are not that don't have utility, we're very good at binning. We're very good at fighting about them. That's all we do constantly in every subject.

>> So So are you saying that Jesus Christ is one of Benjamin's knots then?

>> For sure.

>> Yeah.

>> Excellent.

>> I'm saying [clears throat] I'm saying I'm saying it I'm not just say I'm saying it in power in Dowoism. I'm saying it in Hinduism. They're all different strategies to sort of get to the biggest possibility space in my view. You know the interesting like you know Hinduism pre sort of the vidantic revolution was like a load of degenerate basins that covered the possibility space in loads and loads of different places you know the pantheon was hundreds of gods and then they were like oh actually we can join up all these degenerate basins with this idea of Brahman bang and suddenly it's universal and you get these in in Judaism like you even look at the evolution of Judaism was my religion just like you have sort of the Canonite 70 gods, right? You have L and his consort, I think it's his consorts. Those 70 gods, you see that integrated into sort of prophetic Torah.

They're relegated to idols, but we still keep the 70 faces or 70 interpretations of the single book. So, some of the idea survives that sort of validation to make it better or stronger. Some of it doesn't. And that's sort of the nature of all these things. And it's why this is such an interesting forum because it's, you know, people from all different walks of life and all different backgrounds sort of trying to compose the very coupling structures we're talking about in the context of the platonic [clears throat] space discussions which is in itself self similar to the entire dynamic of observation which is weird because it shouldn't really do that. It shouldn't do that. It shouldn't be that way around. It should the you know it's it's confusing that top down ideas can constrain what you can think about or constrain what you can do but it's intuitive in our day-to-day life. Yet we can't find it or we find it very challenging in a physicalist worldview to to make sense of it. And so here we can use sort of observers and you know possibility spaces to start to make sense of it. And the job will be to connect that back to physics. Right?

This is way beyond my ability but there are lots of very smart people doing that all the time.

you all might be interested in um Ta Ry's work on moral psychology just in terms of all the stuff about ritual and religion going on and then back to the sub people talking about earlier about relational realism. He argues and I think does a really good job of amassing a lot of evidence for the idea that moral psychology is just about regulating relationships with yourself and other people in society. So I think there's a way to combine some of the ideas in this discussion uh with uh his research. So, I'll throw in some links at that as well.

Caroline's trying to understand what we believe now.

>> Yeah.

>> After one time [laughter] and where that came from, what utility that provides.

>> Yeah. But I I I don't think it's like, you know, a hard thing. And I think it's you know I always wonder why things stick around or you know what thing what makes something robust and good and you know beautiful and like these things are seem to have a value like aesthetics seem to have a value coherence seems to have a value symmetry seems to be why is why what's the why question the why question to me is these systems are preodern intuitive in intu intuitionbased versions of structure discovery. They're like bottom up with physics. We can go particle A is here. It goes through this slit. It's now here. This is the wave etc. And we can build up a very distinct picture of the parts. When we take the whole, we're by nature coarse graining a much bigger space. And because language also evolves and the things we can say evolve, those intuitions sound very silly when you read the book literally. Which is why most of these traditions have, you know, in at least in the theological not scholarly aspect have four, you know, three or four different levels of reading of these books. And the interesting thing for me is that why why do all of these religions tell stories? Why why you know if if you know the Bible is true or you know the Torah is true or you know um Buddhist the Buddhist precepts the eight noble path is true why why do why do we write stories why are they told in story and I think it's because story is a technology that you know is effectively parasitically coupling to your subconscious you don't you don't validate a story as it's being told you take the story because you put yourself in in the frame of the observer in the story and because you're not turning on that validation through either myth or fiction, you are integrating the deeper messages of that model in a very coarse way. And so why are these things persistent? And why are the structures of stories why the people like Joseph Campbell are able to write like the monoth? Why does the monoth exist in all of these different forms? It exists because it's the best techn Well, it's not it's not the only one. This just seems to be the more effective technology than the circular story that used to sit within the Greek Greco Roman tradition about the eternal wheel for doing certain things. And so those two story structures are like subconscious technologies to imprint on us different bounds for what we think about. And I think that's why they're compiled in the way that they are, even if the language is sometimes hiding what I think are quite deep ideas about structure within them.

But yeah, so I always end up talking about religion on these science calls.

It's uh terrible. I should go slap myself and say I'm sorry.

I love it.

I mean my understanding is that science is a religion according to most definitions of a religion and in fact it's currently the religion that guides the politics. So it's like the separation of church and state being completely failed and now the the church that is guiding politics is science and there's a lot of dogmas and a lot of >> science is amazing right like >> it seems to have some similar >> points if it wasn't so bloody good at what it did it wouldn't be that but it does have downstream impacts because certain philosophical or aimatic positions in science you know basically say, "Forget, you know, the last, you know, 5 10,000 years of human history and all the things that we've done. Forget about those. I did. They were preodern. They were stupid. This is a better way." And I just think that, you know, the analogy I give is that there are more possible emotional states accessible to us than there are physical states because each individual person has their like a real number versus an integer. Um and I think that because we intu I think this is sort of intuitively first order when we describe an emotion if we if we experienced an emotion and then we printed out every single you know position of every atom in your body every firing and you gave that print out as you know the 50page pack to back to you and I said look this is your emotion this is what love is you might say yes that is what it is but it's not the full part of that experience I'm missing something I'm missing information here >> I'm missing the the gest the whole I'm missing the whole the parts do not compose to the whole because the whole operates at an exponentially higher level with less entanglements more degrees of freedom that to the to the sort of physical read at the bottom you can't recover it and it's the same reason that you know physics cannot recover chemistry or biology I Think I think it's the same exponentialization that happens in descriptions that you you need to go up to a level of abstraction in the description to access the states and by doing that you throw away some of the microscale dynamics which is in fact what we see with you know informationational entropy you like that is coarse graining in and of itself and so to me these sorts of dynamics explain why science is exceptionally powerful drives our world but also I think leads to, you know, philosoph philosophy that by its nature is reductive just like the sciences because these systems couple.

When you have the enlightenment, you also get modernism, you also get structuralism and then everyone turns around and that sort of exhausts itself because it's not the biggest possibility space and therefore it can be attacked.

You get postmodernism as our sort of preeminent explore technology. It drives us into loads of different basins because it basically collapses the computational distance. You could it tells you you can change your internal model in any way that's internally validated to yourself. You know, like that is the pro. I think to me that's the computational promise of postmodernism. And we get that and we have 70 years where we go this is fantastic and science and postmodernism are working together and we get hip-hop, we get dance, we get all of these new things. We get fantastic developments in computing and AI and we get to the point today where all of those basins are now they're too far apart. they can't sort of couple in the same way or they're coupling in effectively and you get extremes within those basins because when a basin is just working within itself and it's not connecting to the other it's only doing exploit and as you go further down the basin the computational cost of sort of mapping that basin must increase I think and or increase to a level that means that it's computationally expensive the further a basin sort of deepens for another basin to connect to it and so why do we have dynamics like you know, pardon my language, I'm not American, so this is going to sound political and partisan, but it isn't. We have a slightly crazy left. And what do we get with a slightly crazy left? We get a slightly crazy right because you can't get the the perturbation of having like a centrist Republican will not pull the sort of superructure back to equilibrium. So you need with the extreme on you know relative extreme versus say a Clinton or an Obama on the left you need the relative extreme on the right to perturb that system in the same way and everything comes back to Carl's active inference dynamics and I'm just expressing it comput I think I'm just expressing it computationally but that that's the that's the dynamic that we live with and so you need a system that says hey these are the boxes we're playing with and these are the systems expressed in this fashion You may disagree with the conclusion.

I'm not in the business of conclusions.

I'm sort of in the business of here's a language to talk about it and here's a language to try and have that discussion in a way that's not that lets you peek over the top of your basin to have that.

And I think meaning is created when those basins join together because when observers couple their computational power is multiplicative and the bigger the networks we create the better. Now those networks I want to cut in here briefly just to mention I would be remiss since you've been on about religion for quite some time about the two religions that deal explicitly with number um since Carl mentioned the mathematics and those would be you know Pythagoreanism and Dowoism um in which both cases they talk about a sort of a neoplatanism to a degree where they talk about a theory of emanations whereby you start with a primordial unity and then you have various forms of complexity actually both Dowoism and um the fact talk about the ones becoming twos becoming threes but then I think it's also kind of important to note that in these traditions there's a translational layer and direction in both directions so there's a birectional thing towards greater complexity and then backwards sort of towards greater unity um and one of the things I think that gets trapped in these sort of let's say antic dogmatic systems of which religion is often one or particularly when it becomes theological um you can you and basically be trapped in a particular formalism. And I think that goes into what you're just describing about being, you know, we had a lot of maybe formal categories, then you go into a period that's more chaotic. Um, some of these systems seem to embrace the chaos as well. Dowoism would be one that, um, accepts a certain version of chaos as well. Um, that can be complimentary to more formal systems, but other ones don't. You know, they are basically just a single formal system. So I just wanted to you know make that distinction and and >> I think the distinction is is is right and I think it's actually not just um Pythagoreanism and Dowoism. So Dowoism uses like the Ching which is the hexadesimal it's like a hexadeimal system. I think it's six uh I think it's like 64 64 positions and six and six different compositions of those directions that you can get when you throw the sticks down. When you go to something like Judaism, Judaism has a layer. So Judaism in Hebrew is an alpha numeric system. So they have this idea of and these ideas have been built have been developed over sort of 1500 years.

Uh it's called Gamatria where each of the letters you might you know I don't know if anyone's on Twitter and follows Nick Lan but he does a diet version of this which is made up but this um idea sits in the in in Judaism it also sits in Islam um in Arabic so they use numbers to com to basically sum word values and you get weird patterns and it's you know you know you can take it as numerology or you can take it as encoding structure. depending on which side of you know belief you sit on. Um but they do that and the interesting thing about Torah is Torah is a really strange system as a book because numerically when you take the letters in Torah you can compose them. So Torah is cut in one way with words now and each word has a numeric value and each letter can be blown out. So if you imagine you have ABC, you would spell a the letters A say A Y and then you would sum the numbers and they have this fractal and recursive nature to them that exists in the tradition and I work with some I you know study with someone who is obsessed with that sort of stuff. I'm you know slightly less interested but it's um it's definitely something that you see in structure structurally in these books because I'd imagine to survive those number number at some level is probably important because symmetries and numbers they're computationally efficient they're easy to pass they give the different level of meaning they build that state space whether or not they're >> like error correcting codes >> correct sorry >> error correcting codes >> kind of >> I Maybe a good analogy. I don't >> check some. I don't know.

>> I don't know if I know enough to comment accurately.

>> No, I didn't mean to interrupt just >> Yeah. So when you think about like like so when I think about sort of religions and dogma I think mostly religion is packaged to get as many observers as possible to look at it. It's packaged for attention at some level. And so the simple message is often the one that's propagated versus the more complex message which is what normally sits at the top of those religious hierarchies in you know in the priests in monasteries in um you know in um in uh in like Buddhist monks in in Tibet and they are doing the higher order stuff the full the sort of full hit of the whole fruit and as that message propagates down the structure those observers are in many more bases.

and therefore they can't go as deep in the core basin. So it they give them simple message they give them the simple message the the lowc cost message to draw them in and I think the confusion comes where you take the simple and say that's the whole thing but if you have an you know in theory an infinitely deep system which is what these are meant to be then that would be a very silly thing to say because it's make effectively making it finite. It's turning it into, you know, turning a rule that a religion tells you do into the equivalent of an idol like or and an idol here is anything that's not pointing at like the best attractor, the steepest gradient, the biggest possibility space. You pick your poison. But that's the that's sort of the I think the dynamic that's going on in those types of super structures.

Because you still need the small the whatever the the pass down message to be somehow relevant enough to couple to people to have utility to provide utility, right? And that's often right. It's it's mistaken for the whole, but it's also not optimized to the specific person that is receiving that message, right? And so it's almost like the the two-level problem. Like it's kind of optimized to a generic audience.

That's right. But um >> yeah, you're right. And I think you think about it like I I'll give you the example from my religion because it's the only one I know well enough to do it. Um but Judaism categorically, right? If you think about Judaism as a sort of book of law or what it's telling you to do, Judaism's basic categorical construct is we are this is the minimum rule set for a stable civilization that called the Noahide laws. There are like seven laws in uh Judaism that they say every human should follow and they're like categorical laws. It's like don't m don't kill you know is one of them but it doesn't have all the sublaws of all the nuance. They have that and then they blow it out to sort of the ten commandments which are the extra three that Jews have to do and then they blow it out to 613 commandments. So, you know, they each layer, you know, and if you go to any sort of religious community uh in Israel, they'll be trying to do as many of the 613 as possible. If you speak to me as a secular Jew, I might try to do the first 10. And so they keep the they keep the first you know they keep the sort of big ones and they're like try and do these you'll have still have noise but you're roughly pointing the right way. It's better if you can do all of them but try not you know like here are the ones that we and Christianity like you can pick Christianity is like major innovation is like is you know love neighbor right this golden rule it's like maximize observer a coupling no one is you know just just uh just just say Jesus is the man >> and you are in you're in our basin don't worry about it we'll figure it out at the at the end Jesus will come back you'll see him you'll be like it's all Don't worry about all your stuff. He'll absolve you of all your sins. You're in our basin. And Islam is like the sort of response to that. Just like politics has the response of extreme to extreme comparative not absolutely because this can only be looked at from its antessin.

Comparatively, Christianity is a ve is a radically open system and it's exceptionally powerful. And look at you know western world has done some brutal and horrible things. But we've also built NRAAM and the Vatican and all of these beautiful wonderful things that have given us great stuff. And then Islam sort of emerges roughly for you know hundreds of years later and it's like bit too open. We need more strict more structure here. We need you know now it's not just touch Jesus. It's pray five times a day. there's much more there's much more structure around Islamic Islamic theology and and it's it's it's um captured in sort of the jurists versus the Sufis right so Christianity is many of you know has I can't even I want to say more than 50 to 100 different denominations of Christianity different types of churches whether it's Mormonism or Calvinism or Catholicism or Protestantism or the branching that happened post the reformation of which seven or eight different types of or marginal flavors of Christianity came out. Islam has two like it has had had two for 1400 for nearly for nearly 1400 years and that binary that binary is intrinsic to its structure because it requires more action. They don't have met as many degrees of freedom in their higher order structures. Even though those higher order structures when you look into Sufi metaphysics it's stunning and beautiful and the things the Sufi's produced are just some of the most unique poetry roomy but they all they have the binary so it's a much more reduct it's much more uh it's a much more aggressive system than Christianity which is much more diffuse and Judaism which is I'd say probably some somewhere in the middle right we have maybe 10 or 15 you know few in the popular denominations of Judaism and I'd say a bit bit less a bit we're it's less easy to less open than Christianity but it's also probably less slightly less structured than Islam and so when you think about these religions as systems you start to see the failure modes of said systems in the context of the world that we live in today where those systems are also competing with something like postmodernism or with science where you have novel perturbations that weren't there for thou you know for hundred you know really science is you know two three centuries of that sort of perturbation postmodernism 70 years in the grand scheme of a few thousand years that's like you know a stock market crash and if and you want to use that sort of analogy it's like a big it's a and that's what we're going through right now we're going through the crashing of all of these systems into each other so figuring out How to articulate the language of these systems seems quite important. At least that's what that's what I that's brought me to the weird strange places. So any fundamentally irresolvable though that there's sort of no fundamental ground truth to like adjudicate between differences even within the same tradition. Um whereas as Carl was suggesting within mathematics we at least have a formal system that can be universalizable.

>> Yeah, I think Carl's right. I think it's very hard because they're I think they're very hard. I'm not going to lie.

I think that's it's very challenging.

So,