Título: Discussion #1 at the Platonic Space Symposium
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oL4G2_Oznk0
Duración: 101.2 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Panel discussion

Well, I I'm happy to raise the question that I raised in the comment form, the registration form, uh, which was essentially a a Gardelian kind of question.

Um it's that since we are as soon as we want to to achieve some level of of kind of precision and definition essentially forced to use mathematics to talk about our own states and our own interactions with the world.

Um however you want to define that.

Then what what are the consequences for our view of mathematics of this fact that we have to use mathematics to describe ourselves and our um states as as physical systems. Our behavior is physical systems. our physical interactions with our environment whatever it is. Um so um I have to use mathematics to describe my interaction with all of you for example.

Um so how does that buy us if it does buy us our thinking about what mathematics is and um what it means to claim that um we are ourselves entities that are amanable not only amanable to mathematical description But for which mathematical description is required for a certain kind of discourse. The sort of discourse that we regard as science or as explanatorily productive uh or something like that.

If I if I can not answer that and extend that uh if you don't mind Chris um it would be whether so and I I've seen a few talks address this um how much uh in so far what is it how how much of mathematics are internalized and used as an extension um of our senses versus something that is completely completely, you know, usable but external or very low bandwidth um with our subjective uh say awareness and computation. Um so how how do people feel they are on that spectrum uh would be a question I have. Um I think it extends um what Chris is asking.

Well, I I I hear two two two different but related questions there. One is if we take the thing that we currently sort of ident and I'm no mathematician so I you know preface all this with um I'm saying that I'm just poking around here but but it seems to me that we have a set of conceptual tools that we currently call this is what we think of as math. And so one question is to what extent does that is that applicable to the things that we're interested in here and what does that mean that that we can use it or or or places where it fails right to capture the things that that we're doing when we relate to each other. So that's one question but the thing that that I keep coming to is do do we in fact have a fixed thing that we know this is the this is mathematics and here are the borders of it and if you go beyond that you're in you're somewhere else. It's not math. It's something else, right? Or is it that uh our attempt to formalize what you know interactions between between agents and so on is actually stretching math. Is it changing the definition, you know, what the borders of what we thought. So maybe certain things that weren't thought of as part of math then have to become part of math. So is that is that changing the definition, right?

Or is this a fixed thing? and then we can sort of argue about whether it's applicable and if it's not applicable then we have to pick something else some other kind of formalism. I don't know what you guys think of that.

>> Well, I think the definition of and and I should say I'm I'm neither a mathematician nor a historian of mathematic of of mathematics um professionally. So this is only an observation from the outside.

But certainly if one looks from the outside uh at least how math has been described by humans has changed quite a bit with the introduction for example of non- uklitian geometry. I mean this was something that that no one had even imagined up up to then and um you know there are now many many many kinds of algebbras u in addition to what was originally regarded as algebra.

How when one reformulates mathematics in set theory then it looks different. When one reformulates mathematics in category theory then it looks different.

Um it becomes much broader.

Um many things that in earlier formulations looked like distinct entities or distinct systems or organizations uh turn out to be notational variants.

And you say, "Oh, okay. Well, this thing and that thing are in fact exactly the same thing. All we've done is redescribe them in a different language." So it it it seems to me from this outside perspective that uh at least how we think of math is constantly changing.

Um you know that of course doesn't address the question of whether there's some fixed entity called mathematics somewhere outside of our conceptualization um at all.

By the way, does that what what you just said about a notational like like when we do notice that hey this thing is actually this the same as as this other thing is that what's the what's the metal the meta level there with you know what what are the tools that you have to sort of take on board to even be able to to make that to make that judgment.

So there are I would say there are a lot of tools you can use and there are weak forms or weaker forms or stronger forms of proofs but this is a very deep discussion. I would say there is not um a rule of thumb. You have to make a convincing argument. You can pro prove by contradiction which is fun to do but in the end you're reasoning. You're reasoning with agents because ultimately you're going to publish it and you're going to have a community review it. Um and mathematicians in principle are also the first ones say hey I made a mistake I thought we could do it this way but after all I thought about it and I found loophole and so it's almost like a continuous dialogue of re of agents reasoning I I wouldn't say um but then of course you have representation tools that will help you verify and ultimately you can also have a geometrization for example of whatever of two objects and then you can see that they relate by some measure and this ultimately for example can you know work in your favor or in favor of the proof or against it.

Um, but I I I move Chris Fields. I I think it was it was a good uh a good intuition.

But I also ask why are we I also ask why are we asking this question in terms of what's the assumption is that I want to tackle the assumption perhaps work it from a different angle is it related for example with the p patterns or um with our notion of patterns because they find expression in our mathematics.

>> Well, if you're asking me since I posed the question at first, um, if you will, one of my major obsessions is the notion of identity.

And in physics, that's the notion of identity over time. Since we parameterize this thing with this parameter uh called that we call time.

But without this notion, physics stops, right? There's nothing to say anymore.

Um and um indeed lots of other things stop.

Psychology stops because we can no longer talk about memory if we can't talk about identity.

And identity is a a key assumption I I'll say or an an axiomatic uh assumption of category theory that uh there's an operator that we call identity and without that notion of identity mathematics stops.

So uh I suppose the the the underlying question uh or the question that underlies my question at the beginning was what is this notion of identity uh what does it mean that we try to formalize it in this these various ways >> I mean this is this is also something that's very fundamental to what we do as well because as developmental biologists you know we we really want to understand what does it mean that you have an embryo which is the same through some you know period of time and that things happen to it but yet you know this is this is the thing that's undergoing change like this is a very fundamental what you know where does it come from how does it get you know how how does it come to be and so on um I I will just say that that the only reason so so in in the the the motivations that I had for for um some of the this work and the symposium and everything. The only reason I brought up math at all because again I I don't I don't have a real background in math. The only reason I bring it up at all is that it seemed to me to be a I won't say uncontroversial because obviously there's a lot of controversy but at least a simpler um domain in which to try to make the claim which some people at least already believe that not all facts are physical facts. In other words, if you try to do that in biology, it's really hard because it's very complex and people will say, "Well, there's some mechanism.

You just haven't found it yet." And and that's probably always true because there's always more more to be discovered. But at least in math, um other other people for a really long period of time have already made the claim that there are facts that are not derived from nor changeable within physics. There's sort of this other domain of of important information that exists. And so so that was my strategy to say is look we we already know this is this is the case or at least many people believe this is the case and so now we can ask the question of whether some of these things are also relevant for biology for behavior science and so on. We can sort of we can sort of move move on from that from that foundation.

That was that was my motivation for for mentioning mathematics at all because at least at least there we have a we have a bedrock where where some people already bought into the idea that that not all important um facts are facts of physics.

I mean um completely and my question was not to I I agree with you and it was I guess the question was to raise the just to raise assumptions so that we could discuss them uh as I find that um for example Chris spoke of identity I I'm really fond of this topic as well and it is interesting to think of identity all the time and everywhere and for example everywhere uh and then all the time but in no in no particular place and these two change I know this may seem hard in biology for example to think of things that do not happen in time or do not happen or happen all the time is more like it happen all the time they are the same all the time and so it's within for example a a time range and in development you see this a lot you know you would have an embryo it in principle it will um stage 22 it will have 36,000 cells as an open embryo. So this happens all the time and and and when there's a variation then we note it down but in principle this happens all the time and so time we can express this also from a time independent perspective and sometimes I feel that this is helpful um because if there is a structured space of patterns and they're independent of us then our assumptions of time uh may be wrong and this can hinder for example um our understanding of their development. if they do, right? Um because what would it be like to develop not in time? I guess this also ties back with this notion of a memory that memory is a temporal thing because suppose this suppose that this structure space of patterns um is is a space where memory is retrieved from. And so all states that already happened and will happen live there. And so what you have is agents that loop around and this is hypothesis of course.

And so depending on a local state they will fetch you know preferential uh points in this structure. And if you want to call this a temporal structure um and there are of course physical models if you will that you know uh could you could do this. Perhaps they won't represent the standard model, but they exist and they're mathematically influential. Um, then we are no longer speaking of time that passes. You're speaking of agents that are a temporal.

Um, and I find this notion interesting.

I don't know what you think about it.

Hi, another thing which is we speak a lot of physical facts and I would like to bring also to the table this notion of relational facts because both in mathematics and in physical models what we are asserting is the relational facts right can I add a question without answering this one uh which is um h how much do you think um mathematics and and related I guess areas or I guess intersections of your own fields with mathematics uh how much do you think they're converging or diverging on the mathematical level um and how far if they're diverging or if it's possible how how much can it stray apart go very far from the sort sets of at least axioms but maybe also concepts and so on uh from what you have right now.

Um I'm I'm saying this because I see mathematics as this historically negotiated corpus. So, so I don't know from uklidian geometry to I don't know algebraas and and analysis and so on category theory um um it feels like well at the very least it's inter subjective um but it's um it feels like we're it tends towards convergence in most cases um but more so so my field or or maybe in your science Carl we we see a lot of the connectivity matrices be becoming less interesting and you have to converge towards higher level abstractions to to to make something very the most exciting to me at least. Um so so do we tend towards something that diverges or or does that sort of converge?

>> I guess depends on what are your parameters.

Um but I find this also I've dwelled a lot in this notion because I feel it's very important for us in further research program in general in this distinction between abstract and concrete and there are of course there are good proposals um from logic to um are there yeah to to talk to speak of this in terms of properties of sets or um but I ask for example in terms of a combination.

Um um because when you abstract something ultimately it really feels semantically but also if you think if you're going to look under the hood um it feels that you're saying less to address more and perhaps this also translates to suppose you have a high feature density I guess this speaks to the the chorus so feature density means you can distinguish something in your data set or in your model and and and that is unique. And so suppose you have lots of these unique features and they don't repeat and and perhaps you would have you would read this as um this would be very rich um and you have less redundancy for example. But suppose the other way around where you would have one feature that repeats 360,000 times. And so this would give you um another kind of ratio, right?

If now this is my question for you to see if um if you ever thought of things between or a spectrum between something that is abstract and concrete along these lines, if you were to place something you know, uh, between these end points.

H having seen the different talks and sort of you know every everything that um that uh everything uh everybody has been saying in the symposium. How what do you guys think about uh how how many like actually different views do we have here like fundamentally how how many different um you know uh I mean obviously everybody's got a different perspective on it and so on but but I've been trying to think of and I'm going to I'm going to send out a uh kind of a table for people to comment on but I'm trying to think of what the what the columns of the the table should be the sort of primary axes or something of that that people would different opinions on um in the whole sort of collection about uh of of of thought here. But how how many different views do you think we have? And what are the what are the primary uh you know what does the conceptual space look like?

Like what what are the primary axes where people agree and disagree?

Like one just to give you an example, one one one basic one that that comes up all the time is uh people people say um you know I I agree with what you said about ABC but I really don't like having a separate realm you know this this notion right that that that there's you know pe people I think like um you know some kind of a some kind of ammonism where where everything is kind of in one in one space and and and they they really don't like this idea that there's that there's a separate realm in some case and so we can argue about what that what does it really mean to uh what does it really mean to to have to to be a realm as opposed to uh just you know some something else I guess some weaker form of it but that's but that's one one axis I think where people differ is to what extent is there are there multiple realms but but there's probably other axes I'd be curious to know um what you guys took away from all the discussions as as to uh other like fundamental dimensions where I one or other axis uh which is I think something like physics boundness um being constrained by by laws of physics or not um as in a fixed set of rules. Um and it feels like my talk is as on the extreme on on both ends of of this weirdly. Um which is u yeah interesting. Um yeah but something about dependency on on substrate >> substrate dependency >> I'm let me continue those question.

Let's assume that everything that we want from the representation exist.

What then? So what will be the end goal?

Because the what we are representing is some subset of the real world. Let's assume that we have everything in the technically create two words. Then then what?

Or if we have some reduction of concept in that platonic space then what can we do with this? What are the best option to do with this?

I would say map it. It depends on the assumptions, right? But if we have agents that or if we assume to have agents that you know can come and go then in terms of experiments as you guys have shown it is possible to uh kind of have a source and target map. I guess this is would be what I'm most interested in.

So, so for you the fact that we succeed to map everything that we we would like to do or we'd like to operate in the world was is a good success of that of that test of that theory >> I guess no but it would give us some um truth bounds for experimental uh means or for managing expectations for experiments.

What what would be yours for example like your goal?

I will try to predict something that I didn't put there.

So there there is object A and object B and object C is infer from all of those and I know that but I didn't I don't know if my tool can do that.

I'm hearing in the metric of verifying whether it is or it's not uh a sort of subjectivity notion but you can have it or or you can zoom out in a sort of objective godlike view of of that of those agents uh that Mariana you just mentioned as well um and I think that makes all the difference right uh so if you switch to also math that we haven't invented yet or that is alien math um So the the the the part where we uh consider that this is part or not of the subjective uh perspective that we are holding right now is I think important. Uh so yeah maybe that's another axis for you Mike.

Yeah. I mean, for for me, what I'm what I'm really interested in is mapping the space, but also figuring out what is it what what what degree of uh you know, I I call it a a free lunch, but like what what what does it actually give you? Because there's a wide range of options. So, it might just give you static patterns like here's the value of E and that that's all you get. It's just like there it is. Or it might give you uh dynamic behavior or or or algorithms or compute or uh you know what's the what's the range of of uh complexity that you get out of it that you didn't put in and where right?

And so anywhere from like we're we're doing some things in our lab like uh giving uh bodies whether whether physical or or or simulated to simple mathematical objects to see like what actually do they encode if you treat them as behavioral propensities what what do you get but in but but like more more generally because that has implications for um evolution for sure for for sure I think to what extent can evolution uh exploit exploit things that it pulls out of that space without having to take the time to sort of micromanage them basically and evolve all the components like what do you get for free so to speak you get some stuff like Steuart Stu Kaufman showed us you get some stuff for free but I think my suspicion is that's just the tip of the iceberg and and you actually get a lot a lot more and ultimately in the lab we need to be able to say here are some anthrobots there's never been any anthrobots there's never been selection to be a good anthrobot and to do all the weird things that they do Where do their specific properties come from? Why did we not see this coming?

How can we have predicted it? What are the options? You know, and and what's the relationship between the thing you make and the stuff that then comes through? So, if we tweak, you know, can we can we tweak certain things about the anthropots if we want other types of patterns to come through? That's what I'm interested in is is is what do you actually get and what's the relationship between the interface that you build, the physical interface that you build, whether that be technological or computational or biological or some combination thereof, and then what it is that is going to be that that's then going to come through that you have no idea about.

>> Yeah. I mean, one of the things that I've been thinking a lot is is exactly the work that that you do and and precisely this mapping. It seems to me that mapping based also on your experiments and of course under the assumption that developmental states um are you know are pulled in or whatever it is that you want to call. Then this mapping can also allow you to in very practical terms um to address for example regenerative um procedures at late stage you know uh so you don't need to catch something early stage uh because you already know how to pick up that pattern in case there is a let's call it I would call it topological defect but in in in your sense is a developmental stage um and and this is why I find the mapping really relevant Um and of course it might not be the best approach but I think when you speak of free lunches these I would say these are the free lunches like the lowhanging fruit that we could um use but also this thing you speak of in terms of evolution of this tendency for growth and form and um I've been thinking a lot about it and it seems that when you speak of perturuations or abrupt perturuations things that were unforeseen so far that then I'll put these developmental uh novelties, you know, like the anthropots or um I I'm very puzzled about the the tail onto the flank. Like why not the tail? Why not keep the tail?

It's so much cheaper. Why not reject the tail cheaper? Why build the limb? It seems like it's the most c I know your assumption is that is more more helpful or that is more useful but I feel that the qu sometimes I I wonder like why it just feels that for example a limb is more complex in terms of edges than the tail right and and there are in physics it's I guess it would you would call it relational mechanics there there are some proposals those exactly in these terms where you where whenever there's a chance let's go for partition let's just go for something that is uh different that has and this would be some sort of I'm speaking in very broad terms this would be the measure of complexity so complexity complexity is just a relational measure for between you and your neighbors around I like it.

>> I mean, it's a very interesting question. Uh, and I I don't want to like dominate this thing. So, so so please, you know, Iette, Juan, Brian, Carl, please chime in, but uh this this question of at what point does the thing give up on the standard implementation and sort of shift over to something else? Like there's a there's a standard um you can call it an attractor, but I'm not I I don't think that's all it is. Uh there's a standard version of an embryionic body plant that it will try to hold to. If you deviate it, it will work pretty hard to get there. And if you put on an extra tail, it will try to make it a limb and things like that. But at some point, you can you can push it so far that it that it basically says for forget it. I'm now an anthrobot. I'm not going to try to make a human embryo.

I'm just going to this is my new, you know, this is my new life. And one of the ways that we're actually trying to address that is to look at um uh to look at stress markers because because we have a we have a project looking at uh stress systemic systemic stress as a measure of being of of distance to your goal state. And there are scenarios where and basically the stress red the the tendency to try to reduce stress is what is what is pushes you to get back to where you need to be. So we're actually like interested in this question of okay are xenobots and anthropots are they stressed out about being those things or at some point at some point do they that's the new that's the new set point and so now and and you know being being a zenobot is my set point I'm now a great zenobot so now my stress can fall like that's an experimentally uh you know detectable kind of thing and so we're actually doing those measurements so that's so that's one way of doing it but in general I I I think that's a that's a great question is at what point does it and and I don't think it's I don't think it's utility or or anything like that in the at least certainly not in the short term. Um or yeah, >> so I misunderstood.

>> Well, yeah. I I don't know. Uh we we we we don't know how how a lot of these decisions are made. like there's so much that that these systems will tolerate and and uh try to accommodate to still get back to what they need to to be. But there are also scenarios in which they just flip to something else. Um Carl, please lower my hand.

Yes.

So um yeah some wonderful questions there and this just I wanted to pick up on this notion of stress and attractors but try to frame it in uh response to some of the questions that have been rehearsed. I just go right back to Chris and question about the nature of maths and I noticed that he used the word dialogue. Um there was also uh Mariana's um notion of discourse and then we had Olaf's um negotiated um corpus. I think all that speaks to you know maths just as being a particular kind of co-constructed language that has you know an enormous amount of explanatory power in in terms of accounting for things accurately with the with with the minimum complexity. Um and in so doing, um I think that the question about convergence touches upon Mike what you were asking about. Is there something else or is this just another version of the same thing? And I call you if you pursue the um the notion that the right kind of uh language and the right kind of maths is going to is going to explain everything as as simply as possible, but no simpler than you're looking for. for that exactly for that convergence and that you know I think that speaks to a lot of what people were saying in terms of it your maths being um a continual process of basically model building a co-constructive model building I think that's that that was a sort of a theme which which caught my attention the the notion of identity in my world that would be self and it would be the self you find in self-organization it would be exactly the same thing you find in information theory in terms of self information um right through to self-evidencing under the free energy principle. And I I mention that because um that stress I think is mathematically simply the self-information or the implausibility of finding this kind of thing uh away from its attracting set. So coming back to the attracting set, I think that you know the notion of a pullback attractor probably has everything that you need in order to accommodate all the questions that I've heard thus far. And that really commits you to a particular kind of maths. um uh and it probably wouldn't be maths, it would be physics. But certainly, you know, the mathematically framed um you you would be seeking out for that convergence that people would you were talking about. Um the kind of maths that allows you to explore all of the issues we've been talking about and also provides that point of that nidus of convergence that you that will enable a certain consensus. And it strikes me that the notion of an an attracting set has everything that you need. Think about Mariana's questions about things that recur in time, memory, um persistence in time, having characteristic states. You you can express all of these things in terms of um in terms of attracting sets. So you just need the physics of attracting sets and that's just basically pullback attractors and within that you can now define self. So you don't need to be aimatic. to say look let's assume the existence of identity in the sense that there is a self that is constituted by the attractor and I think everything else follows and just to bring that to closure I think that the stress is just a measure of the distance or how far outside your attract attracting set is and what will happen is you'll go back to your attracting set so that was my breathless summary of the thoughts that were induced by the conversation Brian, >> thanks. So yeah, I just wanted to add like from this notion of perturbations and I think like one of the issues with platonic spaces that I always reconcile with is whether this is all observer dependent in some sense and I think the notion of perturbations is a nice way to think about making the observe observer aspect as weird as possible potentially like in the computational realm you can do this and I think uh Mariana talked about this notion of you know experiencing time and the aspect that maybe you can actually have agents experience time in a very different way than we experience time. So, we actually already have these in the AI space, like they're called diffusion models. And if you've ever read like the Ted Chang stories or like seen the movie Arrival, there's this kind of gap between how we personally oftent times see time in a linear fashion. But diffusion models in the sequence space, they see time in a completely different way where everything appears at once. And when everything appears at once, you can imagine that this is something that diffusion does where it looks at like generating the entire story everywhere at once. So we're now exploring this because we're interested in whether these same systems learn algorithms that we're familiar with or they learn completely different algorithms in the space of like for example games like Sudoku and things like that. So I think like this notion that we should make the observations as different and as weird as possible and that's the way to actually uh at least hope that I mean I guess we're always going to be locked to some notion of observer dependence but we can generalize that observer dependence further and further out that that's super interesting. Can you can you say any more about that? Like what what what are you what are you actually doing with these diffusion models? Oh, so yeah, we are actually training diffusion models to play Sudoku because Sudoku is one of those games where I mean it actually has a lot of computational advantages too because it's an NPcomplete problem. But the also the idea that um the algorithms that we usually use for Sudoku is very if you play Sudoku like this causal structure of okay let me find the least constrained square and let's go you know go forward from the least or the most constrained square to the least constrained ones and solve the puzzle that way. the diffusion models. If you actually train a diffusion model to solve sudoku puzzles, they solve it very differently. Actually, we don't quite understand how they solve it right now.

They definitely don't choose the obvious strategies of like, oh, let me march down the least constrained square to the most uh to the most constrained square to the least constrained square. It's actually like something that's almost feels random right now. We haven't done enough analysis on this yet, but like the the way it tidoku could also lead to new algorithms in that space and maybe the time complexity of those algorithms are actually very different than time complexity of algorithms that we have created in that space. And again, because it's an MPM complete problem, there's a lot of computational complexity analysis that we could potentially do in the long term from this. So we're just training diffusion models on things that we already kind of have an algorithm that we know uh works and seeing what the diffusion model discovers as a different algorithm.

>> But I think this is also worthwhile studying in the language space too because there's diffusion models in language now. So you could also look at the algorithm that diffusion models require and the representations they acquire by training on the sequences that we believe are you know generally temporally linear.

Yeah. Hi.

>> Sorry, I don't find my e hand. This is very strange. I've been looking and I I can't see it. So, I apologize for just uh jumping in. Um it's my first time uh at the meeting. So, I wanted to say hi to everyone and uh thank you for the invitation. I will try to join now regularly that my schedule is a bit more organized now with my teaching so it doesn't interfere with that. So that's good. Um maybe I just wanted to quickly introduce myself. I um I'm a physicist and I work in the interface of quantum mechanics and general uh relativity and um well I just going to be listening for a while and then see when I can chip in with something more meaningful but maybe just an interesting connection could be that one of the things that I'm interested in is an um uh the interface between the classical world and the quantum world and I tend to see these as two different realms. Maybe this is just like a perspective that can be helpful because at the end of the day you could say well it's all part of one hole so why divided but sometimes these divisions can be useful and um uh because the sort of thing that I'm starting to see is that like the classical world emerges from the quantum world. So I mean they're like um different realms in the sense that they follow different rules uh and but they interact and that's important because in the lab we can go and we can prepare a superposition of an atom going to the left and to the right um and but we also see like well what I'm working is on the emergence of mass from let's say rules in the quantum world and some of the things that I mind that has uh made difficult our understanding of the quantum world is that we try to put a lot of like the classical world into the qu the rules of classical world into quantum world somehow um so anyway I was thinking just about some things that you've mentioned like what's physical in a way what's physics where you where do you draw the line of what's physical or not and we have a lot of arguments about that within quantum mechanics Because even within our community, some people argue that quantum mechanics is physical and some other colleagues say no, it's just uh information and it's just kind of some sort of mathematical tool to make some predictions which I don't even understand very well what that means. Um but uh because we haven't understood quantum mechanics well yet, uh it's still very debatable what is a question of what's physical or not. Um, so I I I think the question about different realms and what's outside the realm of the physical that is definitely something that interests me very much and well I'll I'll just say no it's a bit just saying hi and hopefully I will be able to contribute later on.

>> Great. Thank you.

>> Was lovely hearing you.

Thank you.

>> And I agree. I I find myself rarely using these terms of physical and I don't find them very useful and there are a lot of mathematical um or mathematicians that are contributed immensely to mathematical biology which end up contributing a lot to to quantum theories or field theories. Uh because of this because the morphogenesis in a sense has this sense of of pinpointing the questions of the first mass um and and how mass behaves at different scales and um we have all these effective theories uh and models um that you know have predictive power but then the on the other hand we cannot find the physicality for them. the temperatures are off. Uh they don't reproduce anything but that behavior. I don't know. Um it was lovely hearing you.

>> Oh, thank you very much. Yes, I'm excited about joining this discussion because thanks go way back. of the the previous topics which had to do with what we're actually trying to achieve with both this discussion but with science in general mapping our space in general and um in a sense one can can look at it from two fairly different perspectives. One is the perspective of trying to predict what we will see and the other is from the perspective of trying to characterize what we won't see.

And if you think of mathematics as a formal system uh or if you think of physics as uh a set of symmetries, a postulated set of symmetries um where everything else every everything beyond the statement of what the symmetries are um is a relative act of the sort that Mariana was describing earlier.

Then what comes out of those two ways of proceeding is a list of things that you can't do or a list of structures that that don't occur that don't make sense.

Uh a list of no-go theorems, right? Like Girdle's theorem for example.

and everything else is um you know sort of subsumed under uh th White's law of the ants or what Galman called the the totalitarian principle that everything not explicitly forbidden is mandatory.

Right? If if you can't prove that something won't exist, then you're going to bump into it somewhere. So, it's a possible pattern or a possible attractor in Carl's terms.

And it may be entirely unclear how to construct that attractor, but in the absence of a proof that it's impossible, um, you can expect it to be constructed somehow.

But that's a very different very negative way of describing what one is trying to do to say that what one is trying to do is characterize the impossible.

>> Carl, please >> um I think it's an excellent point. Um I'm just thinking you want a more positive um take on that. um you could invert the problem and just assume that we want to characterize systems that can exist um and then work from there. And in that sense, what you are doing is saying that if a system is characterized by these characteristics, then it can't be over here in some state space. And that's just the surprisal self-information or stress that we were talking about before. And that comes for free with just writing down a density over states that can be occupied. And of course there are many more ways of being dead than alive. And it's a very small attracting set that that remains there.

Um in answer to that question well there's a previous question I um I would have liked to have answered before in my world the utility of having the right kind of maths means you can uh simulate things in silicone. And if you can simulate things in silicone then you can now um do forecasting you can do now um scenario modeling interventions you can sort of test hypotheses about pertubations to the system and this becomes really practically relevant certainly in things like computational psychiatry where you start to simulate people for example and when the say sense making or decision-m goes wrong uh or any suborganizing system like climate um you know financial services, fintech and the like. Getting the right maths and the right kind of self-organization in play opens up a whole world of practical and really important ways of intervening and testing hypotheses via via simulation. The other application of course is you can actually test hypotheses about the unknowable mechanisms of the system that you're interested in because you can't observe it directly. So now you can start to test hypotheses about the mechanisms via uh because you've got the you're the right simulation uh test bed and then finally if it's all working you can put it into a diffusion model and make artifacts and you can sort of then move into the world of um autonomous vehicles uh your uh artificial intelligence research. So actually using these um the right kind of maths to drive and to create artifacts that somehow um embellish or uh endorse our ecosystem and you know the things that we actually play with and use. So I think you know the practically from my perspective that it's really important to get the maths right because once you get the maths right you can now answer all sorts of really important questions.

Could I ask uh about what you guys think about the distinction between uh simulation and explanation because because this so so this comes up in biology in the following way. I'll say look uh we need to understand why you know why this thing is doing that and people say well it's emergent and I say well what what does that mean and they say well what it means is that if we were to simulate the the micros the sort of micro rules that are driving it this is what we would see and it's a regularity that holds in the in the world that that's that's that's what it is you say but what what does that mean that it's a regularity that holds and and what they mean is if we simulate the the low-level rules then out it will come and we can sort of show that that's the case and get a sort of catalog of these things and and that's and that's that. So I'm I'm interested in what the relationship is between being able to simulate it and thus show that yes, in fact that is what happens versus understanding what's going on. And and I was sort of thinking about the the an extremely minimal case of this like the glider in the game of life, right? If if if what what does it mean to understand the glider? Let's say the the rate at which it moves or the angle at which it moves or something. And so what somebody can very easily do is show me the four steps, right, of the the the cycle of of the thing, you know, moving over and and we can all agree that yep, sure enough, with the physics of this world, that is exactly what happens. Nothing more to say about that. But have you explained it or have you simulated it? Because with enough simulation, it seems like we could get the answers and maybe not understand much of anything. I I don't know. What what what do you all think is is there a distinction? And and if so, what what is it?

So for me I think I have a very pragmatic distinction which is it's a continuum explanation and virtual simulation but if you can accelerate the simulation to a point where it doesn't have to run in real time or doesn't have to run in reality in some sense. So the idea is that explanation allows you to skip a lot of steps allows you to go way faster way more forward than maybe a simulator would be if it had to simmit the entire universe to to get to the same point that you want.

So in the cell case it'd be like I can predict gliders ahead of time without actually running all the intermediate steps that require a glider to be formed in the game of life.

>> Yeah, I think someone just said that before and I think Brian you said it too which is about just short compressed explanation. Uh so the simulation is a shorter explanation if the usual route is much longer uh in terms of time and space and compute uh or energy or whatever you want. That makes sense to me and and that's in the same sense that I wrote this thing about LLMs being frustrating because you put so much data and compute into it that you can't possibly think that this is very truly highly intelligent because you invested so much in it. What is impressive about intelligence is that you put not much and you get a lot which is what how you phrased this right Mike earlier um math is impressive because you put something and you get so much more out of it. Um so I think there is this notion of compression and efficiency that we expect and otherwise we are frustrated.

>> Could I just endorse that? reminds me of arguments for universal computation, you know, inheriting from say comraph complexity and compression, you know. So I I when I hear comp compression, I hear uh sort of maximizing the likelihood of your model. Uh and I mentioned that Mike for Mike, you can look at simulations basically as a glorified statistical test. You know, so when we do a tea test and we're asking a question about the mechanisms or our hypothesis about the causes of some measurement or some data, we are doing a simulation, you know, we are building a little generative model um you know a general linear model in you know for for the t test and we're simulating um what could have caused the data and then we're identifying the best hypothesis. So when I talked about simulations, I wasn't talking about um you know using um maths and computers to reproduce behavior. I was talking about the simulations used as a a statement of your hypothesis about the underlying cause cause effect structure that generated those data and then you can compare different simulations i.e.

different observations or statistical models and then you can quantify the evidence for your hypothesis here and hypothesis there. That's what I meant by being, you know, being able to answer the right answer questions in the good old fashioned scientific uh scientific process. But to do that, you got to have the right kind of model and you got to have the right kind of maths that underpins that model, >> which is an open question and an ongoing challenge which I'm sure we're all contending with.

I I I I'll throw in a different way of answering that question. Um, which is to say that um, a simulation may reproduce some effect that you're interested in, but it doesn't force you to change your conceptualization of the effect.

It doesn't force you to change your language.

Whereas, uh, a really good explanation often forces you to change your concepts.

So uh for example uh go back to 1900 and consider the question of of of how there can be atoms, right? Why why are there any atoms that are stable?

And the going theory back then was that I mean the difference between protons and electrons was understood or between the nuclei and the electrons were understood. I mean that language hadn't been invented but it it was known that there was positively charged stuff and negatively charged stuff.

But it was also known that if the if the electrons uh actually moved in the atom, they would radiate away their energy and the atom would collapse. And so there wouldn't be any atoms around, no stable atoms.

And so that was the question that the Rutherford model ended up answering. And Rutherford's point was that electrons don't move.

That electrons can have particular energies, but they're not moving. So they don't radiate uh unless they change their energy in in very precise ways and they can only do change their energy by finite amounts and in fact only by particular finite amounts and so they'll only radiate by these particular finite amounts and that radiation is not due to motion.

So Rutherford's picture introduced a radically different conceptualization of what an atom was.

And that's why it was a that's why it was a good explanation.

Uh it made sense because it it got rid of an entire problem, the problem of radiating the energy away and the atom collapsing and being unstable.

Um, but to get rid of that problem required a conceptual change, an an abandoning of intuitions about motion.

So, I would say a really good explanation of something that causes them is to abandon some some intuition.

>> I I I like that.

>> Simulations don't do that.

>> I I like that a lot. I think that's really good. Uh, so Okay. So, so, so it sort of evaporates certain problems. It inevitably raises new ones. And is that okay? Is there some sort of ratio? Like I' i've you know, I've I've seen reviewers comments on papers where they say, "Well, this raises more questions than it answers." Like that to me seems like that's what it's that's what we're supposed to do, but maybe maybe not. um is that so what what what should be the ratio between the uh the problems that you've evaporated and the ones that you've uh that you've now unearthed?

Well, I suppose the new problem should be more interesting than the ones you've evaporated.

>> Well, you can sometimes you solve you solve a problem by by switching languages, right? You create a new field. sometimes in nice successful cases I guess but you can always backtrack into the other language which is what happens when science splits and science is very split the way I see it uh that's why we have hope for things like category theory and and and things that bridges um things that bridge those between the the fields right but essentially yeah you you have yeah you you have one cake and you eat that one or the other one, but you can't eat both. You can't cash them out both at the same time for now until you unify.

Is Isn't that the I don't know how happy people are with with this sort of linguistics kind of perspective of of things, but that's how I I usually see it.

But you can backtrack. I guess you can always speak the other language. And oh, now we we solve the other problem.

I if it's a common language though um the ratio u that Mike was asking about would be a log odds ratio in basin statistics and hypo you know post-paparian hypothesis testing it would be a base factor just basically the relative probability of these data measurements or observations um conditioned upon this simulation or that simulation where the simulations embody your hypothesis your mechanistic explanations um your conceptions. So the art of being a good Rford or a good scientist is to uh exactly deny your intuitions, your prior beliefs and explore other hypotheses. Then you put that hypothesis in some converged maths and make it into an observation model and then you evaluate the likelihood of that of your data under that observation model relative to another one and indeed you may find yourself going back to the null hypothesis. And if you commit to classical or frequent statistics, then a failure to reject the null keeps you well stuck. Um but if you use you know a more generic um model selection approach based upon the B ratio, logos ratio. Um then then I think that sort of provides a really nice space in which you can think of the scientific process as elaborating new hypothesis spaces and then you've got the technology to evaluate how you proceed how you sort of take a path through the space hypothesis. The challenge of course is to you know elaborate new hypotheses that's ultimately you come back to sort of natural selection and evolution and the law of requisite variety and the like to you know to to uh elaborate those. But notice that depends upon having um having converged maths. So you can take two concepts or hypotheses or models and simulate how data generation under these two hypotheses with the same um you know in a comparable way. So you can evaluate the probability of your of your data you know given given these two observation or concepts or hypothesis. You couldn't you couldn't use category theory to do tea tests could you I'm not very good with this with the term simulation or but I I I like I really like the breaking assumptions or trying to think um you know cross the borders in terms And I think the first time I heard your framework uh Mike or Tame I thought it was it just it just gave so many disciplines a new a fresh a fresh set of tools if you will or um even if is thinking tools and I've been thinking a lot about them in for our research program um because when you have let's say technological approach to mind everywhere and you try to define okay but where is everywhere, where is the limit? Then we perhaps we may find ourselves with this opportunity to to do these experiments. Um, now outside of biology and this is no easy thing to to conceptualize, of course. Um and I I feel that I've been working very much at the limit or at least at my capacity because it requires this interpretative um yeah competency to go into all these different fields and try to match um the framework and also behavioral competencies uh to things we wouldn't otherwise um or to fields and in terms we wouldn't otherwise do and and it's a real mind bender. I don't know where you are all regarding it. Uh if you have uh thoughts also uh concerning the suspects Well, I think one thing that the framework uh requires of us is to uh abandon this notion that we are special in a very particular way as as cogn nitive beings and to um allow ourselves to consider all sorts of other systems as cognitive beings.

And that's um in a sense deeply deflationary.

I'm not sure whether that's what you really mean by it being a mind bender, but that that's what I see as the primary challenge of it.

Yeah, I'm not sure why I said mind bender, but now I like that I said it.

Uh, I guess it's more I'm I personally and I think it's a good thing. I'm not I I don't know how to evaluate behavior of humans, their intentions. I don't I do not know and and I find it a bit puzzling. And so it is easier for me to see from Mike's perspective, there's a technological approach to mind everywhere and there are um ultimate preferences, if you will. Um and and it's easier for me to see it in animals.

Um but now transposing um transposing these classical conditioning techniques um that you would see behavioral changes in animals but then posing this into mathematics or um even to electrons.

um you know if we were to classify their behavioral uh profile or their preferences or their skills um this is what I've been calling what I said that is a mind bender um because of course it seems very conceptual and it has absolutely no use but actually I feel that through tame and uh multiscale competence architecture we actually then have at least a way to transpose this conceptual uh uh ideas about agency in other kinds of spaces and then test for them.

I guess what I mean by this is if you have an observation that's an object X always behaves the same way is this non-interesting or is this an extreme preference a preference X would not let go no matter what you do X will do that and and I think this raises a lot of questions and a lot of good questions because maybe there is something that X likes more and we can test for that and then suddenly X has two behaviors and you don't have uh the same paradigm you had before.

>> I'm not sure. I I think there's another way to look at that actually which is uh perhaps equally interesting that if you look at X and X only has one behavior then perhaps that that is mostly reflecting on your capabilities to look and that X may be doing all kinds of things that you can't see because you're choosing to observe it only in some particular way and it may be that uh the way that you observe it is what leads you to call it X as opposed to something else. And that your method of observation is what um I mean in a sense it's inevitable that one's method of observation is what one uses to cut up the world into systems with boundaries or markoff blankets or or however we want to describe them.

And then that automatically restricts the measurements that we can make as well as automatically restricting um what aspects of this automatically restricting the aspects of the systems behavior that we can regard as behavior because it gets encoded on the boundary that that we have identified.

Yeah, I completely agree. Um, and I guess this poses another question which is suppose you got a new set of goggles, scientific goggles and you have a new framework and you see that X uh always chooses something um in this space but now you found out that it has a different behavior um in some other space but it behaves quite similarly. has one preference in that space and you keep doing this uh over and over. Um and my question is would this be how can we state this preference uh or how can we pose things in other terms than for example perturbation or or stress uh more in trying to figure out what what they want what would be beneficial for them instead of trying to use them because I feel that this is And of course it has been it brought us so far. Um but I wonder if if we are to shake all assumptions and if we are to take these frameworks um I think even on experimental means it feels interesting to think what would they want uh because then perhaps if we have a different kind of behavior um I don't know we would have a little bit of more ground truth um to to judge such behavior but but I I I mean I agree with everything you I I don't think this is a simple problematic. Um I think it's a very interesting one.

>> Could I ask you're using words like preference and want which um I I like because I talk about prior preferences a lot but it does sort of anthropomorphicize things to to to a certain extent. Um so um you know it it sounds to me you're talking about things that that that uh conform to a variation principle of least action. They have a you know the most likely path and that path is the path they prefer. Um and how much do they deviate from that sort of path of least action. Um and um and it makes me wonder whether the answers that you would um supply um in ter you which could be articulated in terms of preferred paths and and wanting to get to the end point of the path of least action um are they scale dependent? So I want to ask Chris um does let's just take two extreme scales. Let's take the electron and the moon um both of which have lawful behavior. Do either of those want or have a preferred course of action or a preferred behavior?

Well, we certainly model them as if they do in terms of least action principles and so forth.

I'm just trying to get at the mindbending thing. So So why why doesn't that apply to you and me then?

>> Oh, I'm not sure it doesn't apply to you and me.

>> Good answer. Yeah.

Yeah. Well, I'm trying to get at the sort of the the you know the mindbending issue. Um because you could certainly talk about the moon having a preferred trajectory or path. Um and certainly uh you know likewise an electron or you know at the quantum level.

>> Um but you know what what is special about the kind of self-organization that Mike is is is uh you know commits his life to trying to understand that indeed this platonic series is trying to address.

>> Why is that principle of deception not sufficient or is it?

I I mean I don't I don't know about the the moon and all but we've been looking at it in uh very minimal computational systems like the like the sorting algorithms that we've all talked about and there and and I don't know actually if so so what we've observed you know for anybody that hasn't seen it is basically that these are simple deterministic algorithms yes they sort like they're supposed to but it turns out they also do some like as as as we were just saying if as Chris was just saying if you look at it from a different perspective which hadn't been done in all the years that um people have been studying these things. You actually see something quite differently and uh uh you you see them doing some other stuff that that is is is very surprising. And I don't know if the right way to look at that stuff is as also goals that they're attempting to achieve via some least action thing or whether that whole framework is limiting and maybe that's the part that's exploration and play and um you know these these other things that are not actually goal- directed behavior. Maybe that's the the the more interesting volitional sort of play aspect where yeah, the sorting is what you forced it to do, but in between sort of in the spaces between that, there's some stuff that for whatever reason the system likes to do. I like I don't know if these are all appropriate terms or not, but I think we can start to look at some of that in these very minimal models. I don't know if that's more minimal than the moon or less. I'm not sure what what you guys think, but but it seems very minimal because it's deterministic. we have control over all of it and yet there is some stuff that's happening in the spaces between the the thing you actually um you know wanted wanted it to do and so this is still something that uh that I'm that I'm playing with different uh different different frameworks that maybe it's another set of uh objectives to to to optimize that it's doing or maybe that's the exploration part the sort of intrinsic motivation which then scaled up is what we see in us and so on like maybe that's the simplest version of what that's that's what that actually looks like when you push it all the way to the left of the spectrum. That's what it looks like.

There's something on the on the chat about >> Yeah, Santos just wrote on the on the chat that maybe uh the ingression of the abstract into the physical maybe also follows a principle a principle of least action. I I yeah, I I actually think that's that's quite reasonable. I've been thinking about those those ways too like the the the the sort of really simplistic way I started thinking about that is that these things in that latent space are under positive pressure that basically you don't have to work that hard to get them to ingress basically if you make an interface there they are. So they're like some in some strange sense pushing out, you know, that's the uh there's a baseline pressure in which they they are going to get into this world. But but there may be a more sophisticated least action kind of thing that could uh be used to describe what actually shows up um relative to what interface you've made.

>> Yeah. I and I've been looking into it because it's hard to discern if what we call or what we observe as a principle of list action is some it's it's because of the configuration of the space or it's because it's the best transportation mean or because it's the most effective path. Um but you have this notion of path transportation mean and then spatial constraints um that can just be if the boundary is a space um and where all boundaries meet but this to say that in itself it is it gives a lot of predictive power in other areas but I feel that for us for example tail and not limb or limb and not tail if you model from you know some sort of like there's no minimization of surprise there um quite contrary and and so I feel that in these cases least action would serve us as to model the path of whatever it is that ingressed for example according to how we model the space but ultimately would not tell us the content And I'm very interested about the content what what is what is being ingressed and so not in terms of the geometric path um perhaps not even in terms of the conflicting dynamics that may happen at ingression because suppose uh x and y both want to ingress who wins more of the content and and I there is of course very good mathematical constructions to to do this and you can kind of glue them all together and then you can look inside uh and and you can see um but but I'm pretty sure what would what would we do with it with the content for example?

So say say it again. What would we do with the what?

>> With the content. Suppose that we can not only model the we have the path everything but we also have the content.

I think then back to the you know the utility of having um a simulation. And when you've got the simulation you can now do intervention experiments. You can now test hypothesis. you can now um ask questions about you know what would happen if I did that how would it respond in this context what you know what are the emergent behaviors and and and and deploy them in the way that we've been talking about I think you know just from a from a physicist's perspective not that I'm a physicist but from a physicist's perspective um your sort of numerical analyses are the thing that get at the content and they reflect the application of a princip principle where a principle is read from the perspective of the physicist as a method. So if you get the right principles, the right maths that equip you with the right methods and tools, then you apply that um to ask questions about the different content under those under those principles. Does that make sense?

>> Yeah.

>> For example, why a tail and not a limb?

Um that's just an expression of a path of least action expressed at an evolutionary scale where you now read uh natural selection as a path of least action where the lronian is adaptive fitness and in fact adaptive fitness can be in this instance um equated with the marginal likelihood of finding this kind of phenotype in this eco niche and the marginal likelihood is just the negative self-information which is a >> I agree I agree with you and it makes sense. Um, and if it wasn't for this research project, I I would not be debating this. But now I find it very useful to debate it because why and phenotype and all of this like why um I feel that our models are very good at predicting a lot of things and we can do a lot of things with it. It is true.

Um but why is it not a preference of some pattern that we don't see um with whom we can obviously interact hypothesis because if we see it like this then we have the possibility to interact for example on this question of content if we have the content for me what we could do is do a code book and we can communicate and perhaps this is absolutely bonkers but in two years maybe we have a new telecommunication system you because this was a bit big nonsense but something nice came out of it. Um and and it it feels really good also to be able to speak this about this with some what do you think of a code book?

So I mean I I would add which which I think maybe is is uh compatible with with what you're saying. There's the there's the there's the third person perspective which I think is is what what Carl just very nicely described where you you you look at this thing and you sort of you sort of see okay uh here's I'm I'm going to I'm going to model it. I see this this particular pattern is coming through. I'm observing it in a third kind of a third person perspective. But I think there's also the other the other end of it which is what does the world look like from the perspective of the thing that's coming through right and and close to that is the issue of wait we are also potentially fundamentally patterns that are now manifesting through whatever whatever interface right you know biological and so on and so when we talk about communication and so on I I think there's a whole research direction here of which is different and and harder than than typical third person science which is to which is to look at the agency of the patterns themselves and of us as also these patterns and the communication that takes place conventionally through the in third person through the physical world but also possibly directly lateral. I mean this is what um some mathematicians have said to me and maybe what what Darwin meant when he said mathematicians have a different sense.

this idea that they sort of p perceive like some some of these you know when when they perceive mathematical truths it doesn't kind of dip into the physical world and come back they're not doing experiments they're not making observations it's sort of they have some kind of some other interaction right and so so you could imagine a direct interaction between between patterns from that space and I mean obviously this is very weird stuff but but maybe that also is an aspect of the communication when we start looking at it from the perspective of of the thing that's coming through not just from us evaluating as as passive data like here's the here's the thing I see >> it wouldn't be weird from evolutionary psychology perspective I mean you're talking about cultural niche construction you know sort of um you know new wave the markin uh aspect to evolution you know if if we have co-constructed a culture of good maths and good just simply providing the simplest or least complex explanation for everything um And that can be um inherited from generation to generation then that you know that's that's a perfectly that is a perfectly cons consistent process with a path of least action where action in this instance you know and has some sort of elevated meaning in the context of evolutionary psychology constructs taken into the cultural domain which brings us back to the convergence and the discourse and the negoti ated corpus of of calculus that you know that we commonly accept as the right kind of maths.

>> Yeah. Um well yeah thanks for bringing that up. Um I guess it is true of I'm no authority authority of course. Um but there is a lot of love and devotion. I I would say that and and almost like even sacrifice that goes into doing maths. Um that I guess perhaps it is a bit different. Um but I would also say that one setups experiments and then it's a bit of like pen and paper but what if there is a lot of what if and then you you state the problem in a different way and you use a different example and and I don't know if it's the same for everyone but it feels there is a some proportionality between this love and this devotion and this uh but at the same time uh this plain curiosity you know that it's it's never really about you um and then I don't know if it's the same for everyone but it comes to you and it feels the the more uh you put in in terms of being alone and thinking about the problem uh then the more it comes. Um, again, I have no authority.

>> Yeah, I'm I'm looking forward to adding I didn't get it. It just hasn't been scheduled yet, but there's there's a couple of uh conversations coming soon for this symposium with musicians because I've had I've had a lot of outreach actually from from people who have said who are not scientists or mathematicians. they make music and they've been watching this this stuff and they said, "Oh, yeah. Well, this is this is what it means when a particular this is what it's like when a particular song makes it makes itself known to you and and you know, and it comes through and and this is like that their creative discovery process I I find very interesting and uh to to compare and contrast to what to what we all do." So yeah, I think I think that'll be a nice a nice addition from from if I can get I'll try to get a hold of some more artists and and people in that space.

>> Yes. Sometimes I've been discussing also kind of informally with some to to ask about this exactly treating you know uh I let them talk and I'm trying to map whatever it is that they're saying to this ingression mechanism and and sometimes I feel I mean of course perhaps you can model it with priors u but there are things that are novel like in morphogenesis you know they've never heard before they believe they never heard before Um, it it is soon. You've been recording it.

>> Uh, it hasn't happened yet. It will be recorded. I'm trying to set it up. It's just uh Yeah, I I thought our schedules were were weird, but theirs are even more challenging apparently. So, but we'll we'll we'll get we'll we'll make it happen.

If I can make just one more comment. Uh from a uh physics perspective we can we always are moving or are able to move back and forth in physics from um uh a theoretical stance in which the world has been divided up in some particular way into systems that have certain internal processes. and and hints um interaction capabilities uh which we can describe as observational capabilities or action capabilities if we want to use that language or just treat them as as interactions.

Um we can move between a perspective that cuts the world up in one way to a perspective that cuts the world up in some completely different way.

And moving between those perspectives changes all of the interactions that one describes between the components that that we've made by the cutting up process but it doesn't change the assumed behavior of the whole system.

So um whatever model is constructed um has to be consistent with the underlying principle that if you just erase the boundaries, take your pencil, erase all the lines you've drawn that nothing has changed.

Right?

So um I I'm trying to get to this point of uh to what extent does our perspective in which uh we each view ourselves as bounded entities.

bias our thinking about how patterns interact.

Given that if we do, you know, take our erasers and erase these boundaries, we haven't changed the the patterns. We haven't changed the overall pattern.

We've just how changed how we describe different pieces of it interacting by creating the pieces. If we don't have those pieces, that interaction of course doesn't exist. But that doesn't change what's going on in the background.

And so when one thinks that way, the question of what does it mean for for these to think about patterns interacting um takes on at least a different flavor because we describe it in a radically different way. When we think of um some some big box with a bunch of stuff happening inside of it versus uh the big box being cut up in a little in a lot of little ways where we think about these little entities that have to exchange information across their boundaries.

>> Chris is not is that not easily resolved just by um picking a particular scale? I mean, you're talking about big little boxes in big boxes, little Markoff blankets uh within a big markoff blanket. Uh the only difference being there's always has to be um a carving of or you know an independency structure to have a cause effect structure to describe anything. Um so the difference between the big box and the little box is a scale that you pick in order to try and articulate and um model your system or explain your system. Interestingly, of course, those little boxes are all trying to do exactly what you are doing, trying to understand the the boxology of of the system at hand. But my main point is, are you not just stating that there is um a choice here that you have to pick the scale at which you want to characterize or model or understand or explain your system?

>> Excuse me. I don't I don't think so. And the reason is that if um the reason I suppose is that the notion of statistical independence that allows you to talk about things causally is itself an approximation that uh we get by assuming that the overall dynamics of the system is um is naturally multipartite.

U I mean and the quantum language makes it easy to say if to the extent that the that the whole state is is fairly entangled then the boundaries that we draw are completely artificial and they can be regarded as boundaries only for a very short time until regarding them as boundaries no longer works.

Whereas in in a classical system that's not true. I mean in a classical system u all the interactions are causal and um any boundaries you draw really are boundaries.

Um but in a from a a quantum perspective that's no longer the case and the the boundaries staying boundaries is um only pragmatic and that's independent of scale.

Could I just briefly pursue that that um so when I um use the notion of scale I included temporal scale and what I hear you saying is that um that certain um carvings um exist at specific scales. So at the quantum scale the carvings are only um valid as an approximation possibly um over very very short periods of time.

But as you increase the scale, the duration where that boundary is in play in a classical or statistical sense uh extends. So again you one could argue that if you um include separation of temporal scales in that scale invariance that it's just a question of picking the scale you want to work at. And in a sense that was my um what I was driving at when asking you to um think about the two ends of scales that we could consider the moon and the electron and why they are not relevant to uh biotics of organization um that is characterized by curious behavior and exploration and playfulness and sort of breaking of detail balance because you don't find that either at the quantum level or um at the um you know the um at the level of heavenly bodies for example.

So just to summarize what I'm saying is that yes it is certainly true that statistical independences um um dissipate and fluctuate and indeed a pullback attractor is itself you know a a random variable. Um but over a certain time scale they are in play and that time scale increases as you increase the scale scale of the system.

Um, let's see.

I suppose I would say that from a um a kind of a global quantum theoretic viewpoint. As you increase the temporal scale, the approximation of things being statistically independent always becomes worse. And the only question is how much how much how quickly it becomes worse, which is which is dependent on kind of density of well dependent on energy density, but it it always becomes worse. So I I I do think that the reason we see the world as as classical at large scales is because we don't know how to look at it. We don't know the right way to look at it.

Yeah. I would also recall that you can do all I mean you can have all these visions uh from a time independent manner and also a background independent manner. Uh so it's it's not only that you would choose the scale or you would choose a metric.

You can literally let the cohortism tell you what the metric is or the homological class or the character. So you can definitely do all that with no time and with no particular conception of space besides the one you're observing. And I guess this is what you were saying. No, Chris.

>> Yeah. Right. Yeah. I I I think we'll I think that we'll eventually be forced to consider space as um something that we impose as observers.

Spatial scales is something we impose as observers.

I'd love to be able to make that more precise.