Título: Conversation 1 with Nora Belrose: AI, sentience, and Platonic Space
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kfPOfsNBBao
Duración: 65.8 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Conversation / interview

maybe just start by introducing myself briefly.

So, so yeah, I'm Nora Belrose.

I'm the head of interpretability research at Eleuther AI.

Um, we're a nonprofit open source AI research organization.

Um, and so yeah, in my day job I've been looking at like how AI works broadly speaking.

Um, but kind of in my free time over the past year or so, I've been thinking a lot about like the big picture questions related to AI. So, specifically questions like can AI be conscious or sentient? Can an AI be a person? You know, do we have any ethical obligations to AI? Or like in in what circumstances would we have obligations to them?

Um, and when I kind of started out, I just took it for granted that a sufficiently advanced AI could be conscious, could be a person, etc. And we wouldn't have ethical obligate or we would have ethical obligations to not harm that that AI and so forth.

Um, but of course the devil is in the details here, right? So like what does sufficiently advanced mean? You know, what does it mean to harm an AI, right?

Um, how do we weigh the interests of an AI with the interests of a human and you know, all of those sorts of things.

And I was kind of trying to develop a theory basically. I mean, like I you know, maybe you can't make it completely, you know, formal or whatever, but I was trying to develop some uh, some theory for lack of a better word about all these questions.

But as I kept thinking about it, I just felt like I kept being forced into like more and more like absurd conclusions and I like just couldn't actually come up with a theory that like seemed to make any sense.

And so, I kind of went back to the drawing board and I was like, well, maybe this is like the universe telling me that like actually I've made a mistake. That actually there is something that's like importantly different about AI.

Um, that like we shouldn't really be viewing them as as sentient. Um, and you know, my initial concern and I think you share or it seems like you share a lot of these these same concerns. My initial concern was that like we would create AIs that can suffer and we wouldn't recognize them as capable of suffering.

Um, and so we would cause like a moral catastrophe. Like we would we would treat them as as slaves or whatever and they would yeah.

Um, and and I guess I was more worried about the false negatives. So like not recognizing a sentient AI as sentient than the false positives, like recognizing an insentient AI as sentient.

Um, would it it would you agree that that's kind of your like primary concern as well or like like how are you thinking about this in terms of like false positives and false negatives? Yeah, well, a couple of a couple of things and and maybe you're going to get this in to to it in in later in the in the in the talk and stuff, but first just to think about what what do we mean by AI and because because I think about the full spectrum from standard biological cyborgs, hybrids, every combination because I think a lot of issues become really clear when you think about not just language models sitting in a server somewhere, but actually like like these kind of hybrid things, right? Which I think are problematic for some of the theories that are kind of sharp categories and things like that. But but yeah, I I agree with you. I think in the sense that I see a lot of people talking about the dangers of humans treating basically mis- mis- misattribution of of some sort of um, uh, morally important qualities to objects that don't have them.

And I agree that could cause problems for sure, but what I see and I'm no historian, but looking back at the history of humanity, what I see is the exact opposite. What I see is humans being amazingly willing to divide and in-group and out-group kinds of dynamics based on really pretty ridiculous differences. So humans love to latch on to some some particular little thing that makes them not like us and they don't suffer like we do like we're real beings, they and we don't have to worry about them. So I see I see that problem as much more much more pressing and so yeah, I'm I'm I'm really worried that we're once we latch on to what it takes to to to make artificial minds in high in large quantities, I mean we do it anyway, right? We have kids and we breed animals and whatever, we do it anyway, but but but to do it in at incredible scales, which I think we can, right? This that that I think is is is potentially a massive problem.

Right, yeah. So, I think um, uh, I think we we were on the same page um, like at the beginning of this year and and I definitely see where you're coming from. Um, and I definitely agree that there we have to think about the whole spectrum um, and I think you do a good job of like pointing out, hey, there's, you know, cyborgs, hybrids, all these different types of things.

Um, I guess um, so I guess I guess I'll just say that like um, I um, what I was hoping for initially was that we could basically build a society where AIs, cyborgs, you know, hybrids, whatever you want, um, can kind of live together in harmony like as equals in some sense.

Um, but I kind of I've come to the the conclusion that that doesn't really work. Or at least it definitely wouldn't work in the way that I initially thought it would. Like I think that um, AIs and when I say AI here, I'm I am mainly thinking about like disembodied um, you know, like programs and computers.

Although I do think that like most of the stuff that I'm talking about also does apply to like robots and things like that. Um, but I think that the issues are just like much clearer if you're like thinking about like um, the disembodied kind. Well, and that's something we should get back to in this discussion because I'm not I'm not even convinced that that the sitting in a in a in a computer somewhere means you're disembodied. So Yeah, I mean I yeah, I've heard you say that as well. I I do think I do think it we should make that distinction actually. So so that is um, but yeah, I appreciate the kind of like problematizing of that distinction.

Anyway, um, but yeah, so I think that like at least if we're considering um, sort of purely digital AIs, um, I don't think that like those types of AIs and humans can ever be equals in any like meaningful [clears throat] sense because like our concept of equality doesn't really apply to things like AIs.

It makes sense when you're dealing with biological organisms of the same species or whatever.

Um, but like AI and I think that you would probably just agree with this in general that like um, you know, uh, we have to think in terms of a spectrum and so like equality isn't really like a concept that makes a lot of sense here. Well, I I agree in that I don't think we should be focused on equality with humans per se.

I'm thinking of like we have we have we should we share the planet with many living things that we don't consider equal in some sense, but nevertheless of of moral relevance. I assume if aliens come down with weird cognitive capacities that are not exactly equal to humans, I would I would hope we would figure out some way to also you know, have some kind of symbiosis with them. Um, in some way like like I just yeah, I I agree with you. I don't see any reason to say that AIs are going to be like humans, but I also don't think that's necessarily the criterion we should be going for.

Yeah, um, sorry. I guess I guess where I was kind of going with this is like um, okay, like if if if if equality is not the thing that we're aiming for, it seems like we need like we frankly need to have a way to kind of put AIs, humans, cyborgs, etc. on like a hierarchy or you know, you could say it's a spectrum, but like it is basically like a hierarchy of like, okay, these these beings are more valuable in some sense than these other beings.

Yeah, [clears throat] right. So so valuable and but but also with more responsibilities. I mean, I think we face some of that in our court system already in the sense that there is this notion of sort of diminished capacity and that doesn't mean you're less valuable, but it does in some at least in some settings mean that perhaps we don't have the same expectations and maybe because you had a somebody had a brain tumor or or congenital malformations of the brain or or you know, too many Twinkies as in the Twinkie defense or whatever. Like like we have that notion and I think I think we're going to be slammed in the opposite direction where you end up getting various kinds of cyborgs showing up in court where everybody can say, actually you've got 60 IQ points on all of us, you should have known better. We may not have known better, but but but you might be actually more respon- So so I I I agree that there's going to be and I don't know if it's I don't I don't mean I don't think it's a it's a single linear axis that we have, but there is some kind of space, right? There is some kind of a a space of of diverse minds that we're going to have to wrap our wrap our heads around. Right. Well, so so I I think I would I would agree with with all that. I I think you're the example that you just used with like a cyborg who has 60 IQ points on all of us. Um, I think that um, that is that is the kind of of example that I think we should be thinking about more. Um, because I think a lot of people um, when they're thinking about AIs um, and and maybe cyborgs and and so forth, they but let's just stick with with with AIs here. I think a lot of people basically want to say that like, well, consciousness, sentience, moral worth, whatever is basically proportional to intelligence. Mhm.

Um, and even people who I don't know, like even people who like don't say that they're they're they're ascribing to that view, I I I I feel like um I don't know, like like the Turing test for example, it like, you know, even a lot of people um disagree with the Turing test, but like the Turing test is basically saying, "Oh, hey, um you know, this AI is like indistinguishable behaviorally.

Um so therefore, it's like just as good as a a human or whatever." Um and I feel like um a lot of people tend to have an attitude like that. Um but I want to say so I I think this is a profound mistake. So I I think that we cannot say and should not say that consciousness is proportional to intelligence.

Um especially if you say that intelligence is proportional to the ability to achieve goals.

Because then basically you're saying that might makes right. You're basically saying that like, "Well, the moral value of a creature is proportional to like how strong it is, how powerful it is, how how well it can, you know, control its environment or whatever." Um I don't know if you're going to I'm I'm I'm Yeah, I agree with that. I think and this is this is I think Anil Seth's view as well, that intelligence and and I don't know if we want to talk specifically about consciousness, but but let's say um those don't necessarily track each other. In biologicals, they probably seem to, but but and and even then, we're not very good at following up on that at all. I mean, I would I think that dogs and pigs have probably it would be it would be really, you know, not not not trivial to to to to say who's smarter. And yet, we treat them at least in the West, we treat them very differently.

>> Right. And so and so we're not even we don't even use that criterion, you know, reliably. But But But I agree with you.

I think that that when we make these synthetic uh kinds of things, we absolutely can um sort of uh dissociate dissociate those two those two parameters.

Yeah. Okay, yeah. And And I guess maybe to just like help um help you and and the audience of like my view. I I do think my view is like very similar to Anil Seth's, although I I think I have some like additional kind of like arguments that I would appeal to that that I I don't see see him appealing to.

Um But yeah, I'm broadly like a biological naturalist, [clears throat] I suppose, about sentience. Um So I think Yeah, so I think that um Okay, if these things can come apart, um then there's a question of like, "Well, I I'll use the word sentience. That that is my preferred kind of term, although sometimes I'll I think Yeah, but let's just say sentience.

So I would um like to argue that sentience is is a type it's a type of sensitivity.

It's not strength. So it's a it's a type of sensitivity to your environment.

It is you can say it's an irreversible, unstoppable process of learning and forgetting.

Um and I think the the kind of irreversible, unstoppable part is is actually really important.

Um for like a few reasons.

Um so one of them is just I think that sentience or consciousness is closely connected with the arrow of time.

Um and I I kind of follow uh the the French philosopher Henri Bergson or Bergson, um who who kind of made the same point that like consciousness is kind of tied to duration, which is like a special type of time that we it's it's like lived time. It's time that has kind of the has a an inherent direction toward the future. Mhm.

Um So and he has all sorts of arguments about that. Um I think um it actually connects in interesting ways. This is like galaxy brained, but I think it's actually it's actually true. It connects in interesting ways with quantum mechanics.

So um uh Scott Aaronson, if you're familiar with him, uh the quantum computer expert, has written some papers on this and he points out that like if we take deposit that consciousness has to be fundamentally irreversible. And And he has like some he explains like how you can kind of formalize that in terms of physics. If consciousness has to be irreversible, then um it that means that it can't exist in a coherent superposition, which actually seems like resolves some issues um with thought experiments like Schrödinger's cat. Like basically it means that the cat in Schrödinger's cat um that's like supposed to be a superposition of of alive and dead, it would have to be unconscious.

Um and then like the same thing applies to Wigner's friend. So anyway, it's um that's just another piece of evidence that I kind of find fascinating. Like if you assume irreversibility is important, then it seems to kind of resolve some of these quantum quantum mechanical paradoxes. Mhm. Um and then the probably the most important thing um the most important reason why I think irreversibility matters is that I think our our ethics, our ethical concepts, basically presuppose that um our actions have irreversible consequences. So I think that like when like the badness of killing an organism or a person or whatever, um is due in large part to the fact that it's irreversible. Like you you can't you can't bring them back, right? Um and I think that's even true for like benefit and harm, um you know, like uh of any kind. Like like I think um whenever we we um you know, cause pain to an animal or whatever, um the badness of that is related to the fact that like you can't just perfectly rewind time and like undo what you did.

Um um whereas if you think about like computer programs, >> [clears throat] >> uh you you basically can do that. So like if you have a simulated pig, let's say, [laughter] as opposed to a real flesh and blood pig, um with a simulated pig, you could simulate causing it pain, but then you could just like wipe all the records of you ever having done that and just like reset, you know, reset the program state back to like the original, you know, and so you can just like >> [snorts and clears throat] >> perfectly undo your action on the pig.

Yeah, I mean, that's well, uh that's that's assuming that I guess I guess that's assuming that um the physical facts are the only facts, right? So So if whatever you had done caused some amount of So let's say there was some conscious experience associated with whatever you had done, resetting the body uh it doesn't it it doesn't wipe away the fact that that experience was was had, right? Like you can reset it from you can set it again, but if you if we take time seriously in that in that sense, then yeah, what what whatever whatever suffering there was, they had in fact taken place.

Yeah, so I mean, I'm actually pretty sympathetic to like like idealism or something. So like I I I'm not even um I I think that these arguments don't um don't necessarily presuppose like physicalism. Um but I do think that um I think that um we should I think we should assume that there is a close kind of connection between the physical and the mental here. Um and maybe maybe I'll kind of put a pin in your objection and, you know, we can because I cuz I think I think yeah, I can I can like better address it a bit a bit later on. Sure. Um So So Scott Aaronson makes this argument that like moral uh that like moral responsibility and kind of like moral reasoning, I guess, um requires irreversibility. And And I do I do think that that's that's a good argument. Um but I think you can kind of make this point clearer by thinking about some other thought experiments. So And these aren't just thought experiments. Like you can actually do the experiment.

So So like um I think if you assume that a digital program can be conscious, um it seems like we're forced to say that you can kind of optimize the program to have the happiest experience possible.

Of course, this you have to like you have to have some concept of like what it means to be happy, right? But like, I don't know, let's say you have you have some way of of measuring happiness. You can like try to optimize the program to like have the happiest experience possible. And then once you do that, you can like repeat it over and over again as many times as you like. And you can like copy the program on as many computers as you like and just like run it on all these computers.

Um and like every uh every instance is like exactly identical.

Um and like if you're a utilitarian at least, that's like the best thing you could ever do. It's like you're you know, you're just find the the happy the most happiness producing program ever um and tile the universe with that. And we're all just kind of wastes of space compared to this just, you know, this like ideal um this like ideal experience. Um And I think um Yeah, like even if you're not a pure utilitarian, I I feel like this is still somewhat of a problem. Like [clears throat] you have to determine like, okay, like, how do we actually count copies of computer programs? And like, how do we how do we measure that?

And I think And so, I actually do think this connects to your idea of the Platonic space, cuz I'm inclined to agree with you that there is a Platonic space of mathematical objects and so forth.

Um and I think um you know, in this case where you've got like one program that's being instantiated many different places.

Um you know, the the program itself is not changing. It's not getting affected by anything. The program itself is just this static eternal Platonic entity.

Um and you know, as you often say that the the like Platonic space is under positive pressure, so like you you know, the the the program existed even before you wrote the program. And when you wrote the program, like, you were kind of the vessel through which the like program kind of came into the world, right? Yeah, although although I don't actually think they're static and unchanging, but that's a whole other that that's a whole other kettle of fish. Well, so yeah, so I I know you've said that before. I I think I do think that that is wrong, to be honest. Or or I think that like I guess what I would say is um I I guess there's there's kind of like a a dilemma that I I would I would say.

So, it's like, okay, either you you take the kind of classical Platonic view and you just say, yes, um the Platonic space is unchanging. And then in that case, um none of these like programs can be sentient because they can't be affected by anything.

And we can't have any like ethical obligations toward them because they're eternal and unchanging.

Um so that that's one horn of the dilemma.

If you go in the other direction and you say like, well, the Platonic space can be changed, I guess my question for you would just be like, how do we how do we actually know when we're affecting the Platonic space, when we're like adding something to the Platonic space, versus just interacting with the physical world?

Like, do you see what I'm saying? Like, it just seems like it's it's hard to reason about like, okay, yeah, how how do how are we interacting with the Platonic space? How does that work? Yeah, um well, I'm not going to pretend that's not hard to reason about it. That's There are [laughter] many and I'm not I'm not sure of any of this stuff. This is just my best my best guess right now as to as to what I see what I see happening. And and by the way, um be before we get cuz this this will be a whole thing with the with the Platonic system. Just just one other thing to point out about the um uh I want I wonder what you think of this about the um uh the the the algorithms with the maximal happiness or whatever ring.

There's a there's a kind of biological version of this because you could imagine creating, I don't know, shrimp or rats or something with a with a pleasure like the pleasure center firing full bore all the time, right? And so so it isn't just an issue of of the for you know, whatever the moral benefits of doing that might or might not be, but it's not just for algorithms, right? Like, there's a there's a biological version of that, too.

Well, just to respond to that. So, I I mean, I don't um I think that in the So, I mean, I I don't think we should try to like create a massive farm of like uh rats on heroin or whatever. But um I I think like in that case, I I want to say there there is a difference. So, I want to say that like the the rats on heroin, like, each one is unique. Like, even even if they're, you know, genetically identical or whatever, like, they're they definitely have different memories, different epigenetics, different all sorts of different things.

Um and like, you can't um And and actually, this is an argument that Bergson makes is that like every every experience you have kind of changes your memory and then it kind of necessarily affects how you experience things in the future. So, like, even [clears throat] if you're just you know, staring I think the example he uses is like, well, you're like staring at just a a motionless physical object and you like try not to move and you just like stare at it. You'd be like it would it would be like, well, your conscious experience is still changing there because you have a memory of like the time passing and it implicitly you're, you know, you're noticing your heart beating and all all those sorts of stuff. So, like, really and I would say the same thing is going to happen with the rats as, you know, like that you know, they're going to habituate to the heroin and each one is going to do so in slightly different ways and they're just going to have all they're going to like I do think that actually is different from the the exact replica case. Okay, so so that so that's interesting and then so so then then we can talk about the Platonic space now. Like like if it's the if it's the indexicality of it that's important, right? That these guys are the same where where let's say all algorithms can of a certain type can be identical, but the biologicals can't be, right? So, yeah, I think as as a matter of fact, I think that's true. I think even bacteria I don't you're not going to make identical bacteria, you know, no matter what.

Um that's that's true. Um So, okay, so so let's talk about let's talk about the Platonic space thing. So, so here's how I see it currently. Um I think that when we're talking about the Platonic space, what we mean is a a space of patterns, some of which probably are static and unchanging. So, it contains some objects, mostly that are currently enumerated by mathematicians and so the value of e and some of these other like stuff like that. That that may be it may be eternal and unchanging. It may be it's not doing anything.

Um but I think that what might be happening is that there are also other patterns in that space that have different properties and those and and they do change over time and they might be um I'll just give you an example of some some things to kind of um crawl up that that axis. Like, think think of the liar paradox, right? So, this sentence is false. So, if you give it a time, so so Patrick Grim did this whole thing of using plotting logical sentences as dynamical systems. And so, if you give it a sense of time, what you have is an oscillator and it just kind of sits there going true false true false, right? So, not exactly a scintillating conversationalist, but also not not static, right? And so, you can imagine you have some patterns in the space that sit there like rocks and do nothing other than be what they are. You have other patterns that just kind of sit there and and and do this. And and then once you have that, um you can have other more complex patterns. For example, again, Grim Grim showed coupled sentences self sentences that refer to each other groups of sentences that refer to each other. And those can have very complex dynamics. They can be dynamical systems. They can be fractal and they have attractors and they can be in multiple states and we're actually we have a project where we're actually training those things. So, giving them stimuli and finding memory different types of memories and and and so on. So, and so and so maybe you can have so some of those kinds of things and then maybe even much more complex patterns. And those patterns are typically not studied by mathematicians. They're studied by other disciplines that we have in computer science and so on.

And so, what I think is happening when we make physical physical objects, what we're really making are various interfaces through which through which different sets of these patterns come through. So, depending on what you make, you might get some input from e and you might get some input from pi and you might get some input from some other stuff. And and depending on what you make, if you make something that's a mouse-like body or you make a human body, you're going to get some patterns that are that are much more complex that are typically associated with kinds of minds, right? Behavioral propensities.

And so, so your question is is very good. How do you know when you've made changes to the back end versus changes to the physical world and the interface? Assuming assuming there even is a physical world, which I I have some leanings in that direction, you know, in sort of the idealist direction, too. But but let's say for the practical purposes, let's just let's just assume that that this is this is a it's a it's a it's kind of a dual dual kind of system where we have to take both both sides equally seriously.

Um I I I do think then what you're getting into and we have a pretty active research program in this. The question is, what are you when you get these in in in gressions from the space, what are you actually getting? Cuz there's a few things you could get. You could get a static pattern, in which is kind of I think the standard the standard view Platonic view that you get these things.

They're unchanging. You either get it or you don't and and that's that. So, so maybe you get that.

But maybe what you're getting is a more of a dynamic pattern that is stateful. In other words, you have you can you can store you can store stuff sort of on that on the other side of it, too. And the way that we can detect that and there's I'll give you the biological version of it and then also the kind of digital version of it.

The the minimal version. The biological version maybe, again, this is all like very sort of uncertain stuff, but there are some there are really interesting clinical cases of human beings with really quite minimal brain volume and normal IQs.

Now, you can sort of try to shoehorn this into the standard neurological paradigm and say that, well, there were some redundant that we all walk around with these massive redundancies for some reason, even though head size is like a real problem at birth and all that. That that we have these incredible redundancies and that somehow yeah, it's it's sometimes you can get away without.

So, but but but the the actual neuroscience paradigm doesn't predict that. It it can it can maybe be made compatible with it, but it doesn't predict it. And so, there are there are data like that that makes you wonder whether some of what we're looking at isn't a front end interface as opposed to the whole thing. That maybe maybe there's a you know, there's a with the that that maybe we're looking at a thin client or something when we when we look at our at our brain. So, that's it. But but that's very hard, right? Those those kinds of things are very difficult. Um we've been studying them in very minimal uh in very minimal systems and the computational systems and what we're seeing in and this is like the the the sorting algorithm stuff is published. The other stuff is unpublished, so you can sort of stay tuned a few months for that. Uh but it's I think it's not crazy to um hypothesize and this is what we're what we're investigating now that what you're getting is extra compute. Specifically, extra compute that you didn't pay for in the physical space. And I think that's that's very important because in physical space you have to pay, right?

There's an there's an energy cost for information processing, specifically for deleting, you know, forgetting and then all that kind of stuff. So, when if if you can show examples where you got extra compute that doesn't appear to be uh paid for in the physical world, you have some evidence that that it it has to happen somewhere in some way. And so, and so that to me is one way there are there are sort of two branches of evidence that we can gain that stuff is changing on that side. One is the biological version and the question is where memories are stored in cases of minimal brains and all that. And and then the more I I think the more tractable side on the is on the on the computational side is to is to demonstrate cases and and I'm not saying we've done that yet, but I think it's not not implausible that that we will.

Um where where you're getting extra compute for free. It's not really for free, but it looks it looks free like a free lunch from the from the from the physical side. So, there there that that that is a research program where you might be able to gain evidence that something like that is happening.

>> [snorts] >> Yeah, so I I guess um a couple points I wanted to make. So, I guess um the the liar paradox is that's a fun example. Um I think in in those sorts of cases, um what a like a classical Platonist would say is like okay, yes, there is a notion of time within the dynamical system. You've got a dynamical system modeling [clears throat] the liar sentence. Or maybe a uh a network of self-referential sentence, whatever. And there's a notion of time in it. But they would say that that is internal to this abstract object and the abstract object itself is eternal.

Um and the reason and and like one way to kind of make that clear is to say like, okay, well, if these if the liar uh paradox dynamical system were like truly changing and truly temporal, then you should be able to ask a question like uh you know, what is it what is the truth value of the liar right now? Right now. What is what is the it's like that doesn't that that doesn't make any sense, presumably. Like presumably it's like if it has a notion of time, it's a different notion of time and it's an a different notion of time to ours.

It's an internal notion of time.

>> Yeah. I I I see it and I think I think it's definitely a an interesting challenge to to flush out what what the heck is going on with the with time in general because you're dealing with a realm that has physical space-time or maybe doesn't, you know, if you listen to um Don Hoffman, he'll say that that you know, the whole space-time thing is is you know, is a is a is an old model that's going away.

But but but you're dealing with with realms with different times. So, I'm not going to pretend I have I have a good account of what time is doing, but it seems to me that this notion of that it has its own internal time is actually a feature and not a bug because that's the kind of stuff we would expect from uh from from a mind, right? That it has an internal sense of time that isn't necessarily the same as other observers it may interact with. And so, my my fundamental perspective here is that we are not physical bodies that occasionally get the benefit of these patterns that we can somehow tune into.

Uh to I think we we we are the patterns and the consciousness that we're interested in is the experience of looking out from that world into the through an interface into the physical world, right? And so, so so there's some extremely minimal you know, mind that that is basically an instantiation of the liar paradox on on that side and then there are bigger ones like us. But the fact that the fact that it it has its own time sounds right to me. That that that seems fine. And and and I agree with you that there are real you know, there are problems like what's the frame what's what's the what's the frequency of the liar paradox, right? At like a what you know, and it's well, it partly it's the frequency of whatever mind is interacting with it at any given moment. some there's going to be some crazy I haven't even begun to flush this out yet, but there there might be some sort of crazy chemistry uh so to speak on on that side where where two minds directly, right? Like like Darwin thought that mathematicians have literally an extra sense, right?

And so and so maybe people who are good at math, they don't have to go through the physical world directly. They they they also have some kind of like direct access to some of these things. And so, when you're interacting with that uh with those kind of objects, in that interaction, you somehow thrash out what's your timeline versus my timeline that there might be some, you know, I don't know. I There's lots lots to work out, right? I Yeah. don't have the answer to.

I guess I'm wondering so so I guess so what I would say just to is that like so the the dynamical systems examples that you gave um those are not examples of um passable Platonic forms. I'm using the Is it kind of a concept from like theology?

>> Are you say say that again of of which kind? Pa- passable. Passable.

Uh yeah, so like I'm not familiar with the concept.

>> Yeah, so traditionally uh God and the Platonic forms are often called impassable, which means they can't be affected by anything. Oh, interesting.

>> And and particularly they can't suffer, but like they're they can't be they can't be affected by, you know, whatever. And that's just a classic kind of Platonist and like Christian view. Um and then in contrast like we on Earth or what you know, in the realm of change and decay, we are passable. We can be affected and changed, right?

Um So so yeah, I don't think there's dynamical systems are examples of of genuine passability.

Um I I wonder if um your kind of Platonic space paradigm would be um kind of uh helped by using some some more concepts from Alfred North Whitehead? Cuz I don't You must be at least a little familiar with Whitehead, right?

>> [laughter] >> Um but like cuz he you know, the way that he thinks about this is he's he explicitly says that okay, there's eternal objects and they're unchanging. There there's never a new eternal object created. Um But he has this other thing which might kind of fit some of your needs better because he he has eternal objects, but he also has this kind of cosmic memory, which he actually puts in the mind of God. He says like God's memory. Um but he says that like, you know, the universe or God or whatever has this memory of like everything that's ever happened.

Um and it's like and every like event can actually like look back on the whole past and you know, it kind of determines which events in the past are relevant for it and so forth.

Um But yeah, if if you want to think about like immaterial memory, um that that might be a framework for doing it. I don't know if that Yeah. Yeah, I I don't disagree. I think I think that's probably reasonable and useful. I mean, at this point, you know, my my purpose here is I'm I'm not I I I'm not trying to sort of flesh out a full theory of ultimate reality or something like that. Like I I I mean, it it's nice to think about those things, but but really the only thing I'm kind of responsible for is some kind of a minimal theoretical framework that that is compatible with and more importantly moves forward the research that that needs to happen, right? So, so I'm sure you know, I this this kind of dualist thing that I'm pushing, I I am totally comfortable with the idea that at some point somebody's going to unify this into some sort of monism and like fine, I'm I'm sure. I just don't know much like with idealism, I just don't know what to do with that at the moment if if that's true. So, so I think yeah, any any of these things that help us understand you know, because because there's some very pressing problems and these these again for us, they come in a couple of flavors. One is the biological. So, so like when we make novel uh life forms, so let's say we make a xenobots or anthrobots or something.

In biology, we know when the computational cost was paid to make a human or a frog well in the millions of years of selection against the environment so this and that. But all of a sudden, you create something that's never been here before. You can't really blame the specific selection for for for what it's doing.

And and so then when when was all that computed? So, you have you have to you have to say something about that and also about what distribution these things come from because it's not enough to say it's emergent or what like you have to actually eventually be able to say why you got this this versus that in these novel circumstances. And then the same thing on the on the computational front, we've we found that even extremely minimal algorithms are doing things that are not explicitly in the algorithm and right and I don't mean just complexity or unpredictability because that's pretty cheap and easy to get. I mean things that a behavioral scientist would immediately recognize. So that's suspicious to me and the fact that even very minimal um interfaces so to speak are are are showing up with that kind of stuff.

We you know it it seems to me just like what happens in math where you often get more out than you put in. You know you start with basic set theory and before you know it you got a you got a specific value for E and you're like wow you where did that come from? So so these you know this is this is the kind of thing that I need I I think I think we need a you know we need a framework to to address.

Yeah so I I I did um take a look at the uh like the sorting algorithm um paper that you did a little while ago. Um I I mean I'm I'm happy to say that like there's um Like I I I I guess I I don't think it like undermines any of my like arguments to admit that um there's like um that platonic forms are entering into the the computer here and it's and you're getting more and more out than you get in. Um I would just say that I think sentience >> [clears throat] >> is it's sentience is is not a platonic form and I don't think it's something that a platonic form can have. It's it's almost the opposite of a platonic form because because I I do want to kind of insist and and I know we've uh disagreed a little bit on this that you know if if we posit these platonic entities we really should say that they are impassable and unchangeable. I think if we if we say other if we like say otherwise then we it's just uh I don't know it we we kind of like run into paradoxes and it gets confusing and I don't know it's just much simpler to say that they're unchanging and then once you say that it's like well sentience is a matter of of like being vulnerable of being sensitive of of being affected >> [clears throat] >> and that's the opposite of Yeah I don't I don't disagree with you on that one if if if you in the sense that yes vul vulnerability and you know this gets into two things which you you've probably seen it's the moral computation stuff right or or you know and and person and also um Richard Watson has some really interesting work on this of of systems that um oscillate between um pushing out onto the world and being influenced by it right so this kind of like dynamic back and forth of of the the part the part that you emphasized which is being um being imprint you know affected or um changed by the world but then but then his is sort of like this this uh back and forth right? So so I think I think that's that's that's fine. I mean I'm still I'm still on the side that um I I I think that if you make them unchanging I'm not it it doesn't help very much if you make them unchanging so I am on the on the on the other side of this but but but I think I think we agree on one other thing I think which is that uh I don't what it whatever whatever sentience um these systems have I don't think is because of the algorithm that was that that they're executing. I think if anything it's in spite of the algorithm.

In other words I I do think there's something unconventional going on that isn't accounted for in standard the way we do standardly do computer science but whatever they're doing I don't think which is which is why in many ways for this for these language models I think the language is kind of a red herring and it's the and it's it's it's it's a distraction you know people focus on on the language and oh it says it's thinking about this and maybe it you know it has these goals and whatever. I actually think whatever whatever degree and I don't know I have no claims about language models because we don't know we have to do experiments the way we did with the sorting algorithms but whatever degree of that stuff they have it's not going to be because of what they're saying and those two things might have nothing to do with each other or they might have a little bit to do with each other um but I don't think you can derive any of that from from the stuff it says. And so yeah I you know um I do I I don't think we know uh I don't think we know what level of anything it has because because the language is is is is fooling us. It's not it's not what we should be looking at.

Yeah um that's fair. I guess um I'm trying to think of where we should go with this. Um I So like I I'm wondering how cruxy this question about uh the platonic space is like um like if you were I mean Actually I I kind of I'm wondering if you could expand a bit on your your comment that um if the platonic space doesn't change it's not very useful.

Well just in the sense I mean I was I think I was just I was uh agreeing with you in the sense that if if it doesn't change then [clears throat] you can't it isn't useful for um then then then that can't be where the where the conscience consciousness is because because I agree I agree with you that being able to be changed by your experience. I mean the other way to to say this is sort of the whole point.

Like like what is the point of these things being and and I know there doesn't have to be a point but still it seems to me that that that if these things under positive pressure and these and these these patterns love to get into the physical world if they can't be changed by it and if nothing ever changes like what in what what is the point of that? It seems just then this is like a total totally just a just a metaphysical bias that I have but it seems boring and useless and it seems like there's no point in any of that. Um they I've got a I've got to think that that there there they're ingressing into this world because they're getting some sort of development out of it. They're getting there's something that's happening where they've done something interesting or or somehow they're ratcheting up or some something is happening where where something is changing. So I mean it's not useless because the math I I think the lessons of of of math hold regardless right? The fact that physical facts aren't the only facts so so I'm not saying change unchanging forms are not viable. I think I think they're viable I just I just don't think they help us very much with what with what we want to know.

Yeah so so to be clear you were saying that um if they're unchange well you I guess you you made two It sounds like you're making two claims.

One is like it seems like the forms are under positive pressure and um that [clears throat] seems like agentic or something.

>> [laughter] >> It just seems like well it just seems like it's and this is I this is not a good argument it's not an argument it's a statement of my metaphysical bias okay? But my bias is that if if they're not changing I don't see the point. I don't see why they why they're in impacting the the physical world and I mean I I get it there's views of the universe where there isn't any point to anything. Um I don't I you know I just I don't resonate with that.

It's it seems to me like like a a reasonable scenario here is that both it matters for both sides what happens.

It's not a purely like like you know flow down kind of thing. Yeah well so I mean I guess um the way Whitehead would think about it and I'm not I've read most of process and reality although he's like hard to under I so I might be like butchering this a little bit but like the basic >> [laughter] >> the basic idea is that like uh eternal objects are like I'm actually not sure if he would say they're in the mind of God but they're definitely like organized by God in some sense. Um and so I think he would say well the eternal objects are they're not agentic they're not changing but God is changing and that's actually one of the things that a lot of like traditional theologians are like uh gasp like God changes what? But like Whitehead says yes God changes. Um and so for him he's like he would say like um in some sense God is kind of helping determine like when which eternal objects are relevant at which situation and it's kind of and God is the one who's kind of getting something out of it in some sense. Some sort of yeah. I I mean I'm okay I mean this is this is way beyond my pay grade >> [laughter] >> at this point at this point but but I'm I'm completely okay with some sort of a structure of that platonic space where there's a bunch of there's a bunch of like really low level stuff that um that that that you know sort of sort of just never changes and and and by the way I've been taken to task by by a couple of mathematicians who have said that because I call these mathematical things low agency forms like how do you know have you tested and you're right I I haven't so so maybe I'm wrong there.

But but you know there's this like middle stuff that's all of us and some other things that are these these and then sort of ultimately we're all some kind of projection of of right all of these patterns are some kind of projection of some much larger universal pattern that's do you know doing something else. I mean I'm I'm okay with that. That's that's that's that's that's that seems fine but um yeah.

But okay so I I guess just to kind of So just to try to see like where we still agree or disagree or whatever. So you agreed that um con yeah so consciousness and intelligence should be distinct I think they can I think they can be distinct.

I mean it's an interesting question how to what extent do they track? I I I do think that it would be very hard to say that to say that a system has a high degree of consciousness and can't solve any problems whatsoever.

Yeah, yeah. Right? Like I think that's hard.

So I I okay, maybe I'll I'll use the last like 10 minutes to kind of send uh tell you about a weird idea that I had.

But so I am So yeah, I said before sentience is like uh the ability to be irreversibly affected, whatever.

Um and it's like about learning and forgetting.

Um I'd kind of like to try to relate that conception of sentience with two other concepts, intelligence and agency. Mhm.

So um I I like uh the idea that you proposed before um the cognitive light cone.

>> [clears throat] >> Um but I think maybe I just missed something in in like your your work on this, but it seemed to me like um you weren't Well, I I I won't like blame you or whatever. I'll just say how I would like to kind of talk about it is that like um there's a future cognitive light cone and a past cognitive light cone.

And we should kind of distinguish these cuz they're kind of different. So I would say that the future cognitive light cone sort of measures agency. That's saying like, well, like how far and um can your goals um like how how broad or what kind of goals can you pursue successfully, right? Basically.

Um that's the future cognitive light cone.

But in order to have a future cognitive light cone, I would argue that you need a past cognitive light cone.

Um which is basically looking at like how much of the past, how how how many memories, how much experience can you kind of coalesce or compress or bring to bear on a problem? I like that.

Yeah.

And [snorts] I think this is like kind of essential because um if you basically because P does not equal NP, like you you can't uh do a brute force search over the space of possibilities.

And so you need like heuristics and experience and stuff. Yep. Um and then I would say, okay, so there there's clearly a connection between agency, the future light cone, and what I would call intelligence. I would say intelligence is more like the past light cone.

Um and there's basically because um I think intelligence is it's a resource, but there are other resources that also enhance your agency.

Like obviously, like a CEO or a president or whatever, someone who has a lot of money, someone who has a lot of political power might have like a lot of agency in the sense that they can like pursue goals really effectively.

But that doesn't necessarily mean they're like more intelligent per se.

Um like just just you can use Does that kind of make sense? Yeah, yeah, no, that makes sense. So so so my concept and and it needs still a lot of work that's under underway, but um my concept of the cognitive light cone, it's not so much the the the cone by itself is is not so much the uh success with which you do these things. It's the size of the largest goal you can you can represent. So right? So and those things are connected, but but it does need this extra thing of like so it's it you know, can can the can the CEO represent larger goals than you know, than somebody with with no money whatsoever? I'm not I'm not sure that that's true. One one has more ability to follow up on those goals, but but but but as far as as far as representing and sort of working towards those goals, I I like I think those are slightly, you know, they're they're not the same. But but but I think they're both important. Yeah, that that is fair.

I think if if you're careful in defining future light cone, like maybe maybe that makes more sense. I I guess I would in general, I I would like to um allow for kind of like non-agentic intelligence. I mean like obviously there there is a relation between, you know, agency and intelligence, but I I I worry that people um kind of connect them too closely or just like don't even distinguish them at all. And I kind of want to say, well, intelligence is like an important ingredient in agency, but it's it's not the same thing. I agree I agree with you. I don't I don't think it's the same thing. I think we should try we should try drawing some kind of some curves or something because because I feel like at the at the lowest end and maybe at the highest end, they sort of come together because I find it very hard to imagine like these two curves, I don't think they track each other perfectly at all. I think they're just separate, but but certainly, you know, at the lowest end, it's just very hard for me to imagine what we mean if it's if it's a system that doesn't do anything or right? It doesn't it doesn't navigate some kind of problem space at all. I I it's it's hard and maybe that's just a failure of imagination on my part, but but it seems it seems hard to say that it has a lot of consciousness. And and then again, something like that probably on the on the higher end, too, but but in between, I think these curves can be doing all sorts of wild stuff where they're not um tracking each other. I think that's that's reasonable.

Yeah, it's interesting. I I guess um I would say maybe it's sort of controversial uh example, but like I would say that large language models right now um have I mean, arguably have like a really big past light cone. Like we're And and that's part of my my motivation when I was like thinking about this is like, well, hey, there's just this clear connection between like data, right?

Like data and like capabilities. And it's like, well, we should be thinking about like how these like scaling laws are basically just um measuring how much of the past or how much experience you can like pour into something.

Um and I mean, they can pursue goals, but at least many of them are still it seems like there's kind of an asymmetry where like they're they're they're pouring in tons of data from all over the place, but they can't represent goals very well. So so I don't I don't disagree with most of that, but I do but I think I think we need to be careful on one thing. Um I don't think we can judge their ability to represent goals by the things we're forcing them to do. In other words, by the conversations they have, by the behaviors that we're asking these agents to go out and solve problems.

I think all of that maybe relevant, but it isn't it isn't the whole story. And the reason I say that is simply because in the very simple algorithms that we work with. And so we have this this one published paper on the sorting algorithms. We have two more coming out that are even even more minimal than that.

What's happening there is that uh what we what we see happening there is that there are there are at least two different kinds of goal two different kinds of goals that appear to be met.

There's the goal that we force them to do. So this is whatever it is the algorithm is forcing them to do. And then there's this other stuff and I've been calling it, you know, originally I called it like a side quest and and now I'm thinking maybe it's like an intrinsic motivation or something. There are things that they are doing that we never asked them to do. They're not forbidden by the algorithm, but neither are they neither neither do we make them do this. And the thing is that you don't see those until you look. And frankly, we're not very good at looking, right?

So so how long have people been studying sorting algorithms? Like 60 years, 80 years? I don't know. And and and like no one had seen this before. And who knows why like I'm sure we're missing a million other things that we just don't know how to look for. And so my guess is that in these language models, there are at least two things to be looking at. There's the stuff that you expect them the goals you expect them to do. And I agree with you that I'm not seeing much of a goal-directed architecture. That doesn't look like But but I think if we find if we get if we can be surprised by six lines of code in a bubble sort, I I am just not willing at all to be certain that this thing isn't doing something else in some other problem space that we are just we we don't have the either the intelligence or the imagination to look for it. And it might be minimal. And I don't think it it has to be massive just because it has this huge vocabulary and whatever. Like it may be a very small thing.

But if the if the if [laughter] the if the you know, um yeah, I just I'm just not sure at all. And I think it's I think this is all an empirical question. We're actually developing tools for this. So I have a a a number of collaborators and in our lab, we're making some tools to start taking a look at just diverse systems in other spaces to see what might they be doing in the spaces between what the algorithm is forcing them to do. And so I'm I'm with you in that I I don't think there's any reason to yet to imbue impune high high um goal-directedness to to the algorithm of the language models, but I don't know that they're not doing a bunch of other stuff that we just don't see the way the way that it's been missed in in bubble sort and in cellular automata and some other things that we're looking at.

Yeah, I guess um well, we'll probably have to wait until another time or I don't know. But there's um there's a lot of questions there about like how exactly like how methodologically you go about determining um like whether there's like something else going on. Yep. Um and yeah, there's there's like a lot of work in the interpret like AI interpretability space um which tries to find like circuits in um in uh neural networks, which I'm I'm honestly like pretty skeptical of. Um which but um yeah, there there's there's a lot of questions there about how to actually go about doing that.

>> I agree. This is this is a massive un un unsolved problem. Uh we're just beginning to make some tools for this.

And I I think it's it it is it is at such an early stage because we've had mean when when you talk to people you this the standard paradigm is all right biology is complicated and if you tell me that my mind is is not captured by the laws of biochemistry I could sort of go along with that at least many people say that that yeah I'm I'm more than the the rules of biochemistry but no worries at least over here we have these dumb machines and they do exactly what the formal models say they do the right the formal models of of chemistry do not tell my story but the algorithms and Turing machines and all that nice stuff tells the full story of these things and I think our formal models never tell the full story basically and that we've just we've kind of optimistically assumed that at least we've we've gotten this down to to to the to a pure form where they where there are no surprises but I but I think it yeah but I don't think that's true I I think I think the stuff seeps into everything not just the not just the biologicals I think it it seeps into almost everything and that's why we're so behind I think that's why we're so behind making those tools because we've been assuming that the algorithm and and that our view of these things tells the whole story yeah I think um I I definitely don't want to just like dogmatically assert that or I don't you have your like sorting algorithm paper on it I mean I I don't want to just like assert that like oh because it's in a computer therefore uh it's like only doing the algorithm that we told it to do um that said I I do think that there actually is an important kind of metaphysical difference between physical things and simulated things basically um and I I guess and and I think fundamentally like like I think it it's not really mysterious why there's a a metaphysical difference like I think that you know simulations are they're running on digital computers and they're designed that the the computer is designed to kind of make everything predictable and you know controllable copyable >> it it it tries it does it does it does its damndest to try right that's that's the design you know we we we have abstraction layers and and error correction and all this all this other stuff so we really try we try to make it that way but yeah I'm just not sure I'm just not sure it's we we ever succeed at that but it is reproducible though right like it is actually reproducible sure right and and I I I just I I do think that that like the reproducibility and copyability that does matter for sentience because that is related to this whole like idea of like can you exactly copy the AI and you know it is it a platonic form or is you know that's on you know but I don't I see it and I think I think that is that is definitely an interesting point I I I need to think about this this reproducibility business more um I I think that I think that is an interesting an interesting question to be asked I mean the reason that I so so I used to think that was a key difference too right that that that simulations and and the the real thing I mean the the real thing is also really hard right given given how we can you know that what neuroscientist is telling us about how how we construct our reality and all that um but the thing that's the thing that's that's partially erasing some of that distinction for me is you have if you ask if you ask the forms do they care about whether they ingress into a simulated environment versus a physical environment it looks to me like they don't necessarily distinguish that's that's that's what I'm working on right now I'm trying to figure out to to what extent to what extent can we say there's some stuff that comes into the physical world and it's different than the stuff that comes into simulated and if it turns out that way fine yeah I like I'm not you know that that if that's what we discover that's okay but right now I'm not seeing it yet um it looks like >> go ahead no please please yeah so I I I think I agree that um and just let me know if you you need to go or whatever >> I yeah I've got about two minutes then I got to run >> okay yeah so [clears throat] I think I agree that um you know forms can ingress both in like a simulation and in the real world I think Whitehead would agree with that I guess I would just kind of uh say that sentience though is not a matter of like what forms are ingressing per se or it's not I would say it's precisely like the um the [clears throat] non platonic part of what's going on or something [laughter] is is the sentient part I think that also fits with Whitehead's metaphysics as well but right yep yep I get it yeah it's a it's a different it's a different perspective on this and I certainly can't rule it out it's you know we don't we don't have any strong claims about consciousness or sentience or any of that stuff because I there's nothing I can do experimentally on that right now so it's not like I could rule out the view that you just formulated my suspicion is you know the opposite but you know okay but it's definitely it's definitely interesting and yeah and I will I will think more about this copying business I mean yeah I think Orbe it all made some good headway there I need to I need to think about that more yeah that's really what made me kind of start questioning things cuz I was like how do you count copies or like what what's going on with these you know yeah it's not obvious to me that we can't that that that can't be that that we can't tell a homogeneous story of that but but I I haven't done so so we'll we'll see how we'll see how that goes cool that's a nice time >> likewise yeah thank you so much yeah this was this was a lot of fun yeah very cool yeah happy to happy to chat anytime if anything new comes up definitely let me know and yeah I'll send I'll send along we'll have we'll have a couple more of the computational papers coming out so I'll I'll I'll send you those when they come out and I'll be interested to see what what you make of them