 
 

Unknown speaker 00:00 
Michael Levin is a

Unknown speaker 00:01 
distinguished professor in the biology department at Tufts University and the holder of the Vannevar Bush endowed chair.

Unknown speaker 00:08 
He's the director of the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts and also the center for regenerative and developmental biology.

Unknown speaker 00:16 
His research focuses on understanding the biophysical mechanisms of pattern regulation and harnessing endogenous bioelectric dynamics for rational control of growth and form.

Unknown speaker 00:27 
Now, the capacity to generate a complex behaving organism from the single cell of a fertilized egg is one of the most amazing aspects of biology.

Unknown speaker 00:38 
Levin's lab integrates approaches from developmental biology, computer science, and cognitive science to investigate the emergence of form and function.

Unknown speaker 00:48 
Now, using biophysical and computational modeling approaches, they seek to understand the collective intelligence of cells as they navigate physiological, transcriptional, morphogenetic, and behavioral spaces.

Unknown speaker 01:03 
They develop conceptual frameworks for basal cognition and diverse intelligence, including synthetic organisms and AI.

Unknown speaker 01:12 
Also joining us this evening is Arena Rish.

Unknown speaker 01:15 
Arena is a full professor at the University of Montreal's computer science and operations research department, a core member of Mila, the Quebec AI Institute, as well as the holder of the Canada CIFAR AI chair and the Canadian Excellence Research chair in autonomous AI.

Unknown speaker 01:34 
She has a PhD in AI from UC Irvine and her research focuses on machine learning, neurodata analysis, neuroscience inspired AI, continual lifelong learning, optimization algorithms, sparse modeling, probabilistic inference, dialogue generation, biologically plausible reinforcement learning and dynamical systems approaches to brain imaging analysis.

Unknown speaker 01:57 
Anyway, folks, I really hope you enjoy this conversation today.

Unknown speaker 02:09 
So without any further delay, I give you Professor Michael Levin and Professor Arena Rish.

Unknown speaker 02:10 
Enjoy.

Unknown speaker 02:10 
Michael, it's an absolute honor to meet you.

Unknown speaker 02:13 
Um, you've got a very interesting background.

Unknown speaker 02:17 
Now, I discovered your work when we did a show on emergence and I was looking into graph cellular autometer actually and I was looking into that um uh the the CNN version which did this concept called morphogenetic engineering, which is this idea that you can almost transgress uh ladders, you know, like levels of the emergence ladder by um describing something at the microscopic scale and then getting this kind of emergent global coherence.

Unknown speaker 02:47 
And in that particular case, it kind of emerged as as the shape of a gecko.

Unknown speaker 02:57 
I'm not sure if you're familiar with that particular thing, but um, so emergence is fascinating.

Unknown speaker 03:02 
But coming at it from from your angle in in biology, how how do you see the interplay between what you do and and artificial intelligence?

Unknown speaker 03:07 
Well, thanks very much.

Unknown speaker 03:14 
I'm very happy to be here and have the chance to talk to you about these things.

Unknown speaker 03:23 
Uh, a couple of things.

Unknown speaker 03:27 
Um, I think that uh, intelligence is uh, baked in basically at the very bottom of uh, the multiscale architecture that we have in living organisms.

Unknown speaker 03:38 
And so what I think is uh, very powerful is this interplay where we can of course use AI and machine learning to uh, try to understand the biology better, and at the same time, we can take all these unconventional examples of intelligence and cognition that we find all the way down to molecular networks and use them as inspirations for things that that we build, right?

Unknown speaker 03:47 
either hybrid systems or or fully engineered systems.

Unknown speaker 03:59 
And I think one of the key things to say uh, from my perspective is that emergence is not the whole story.

Unknown speaker 04:04 
So I think emergence is very powerful and emergence certainly happens and we have many uh, many, many um, scenarios in which uh, highly uh, parallel active um, implementation of local simple rules gives you some kind of complex emergent outcomes.

Unknown speaker 04:10 
We certainly see that.

Unknown speaker 04:17 
But I think the magic of biology isn't just that.

Unknown speaker 04:23 
I think uh, the real magic of biology is that at every level, these are not uh, sort of feed forward emergent processes where you follow the rules, something comes out and, you know, there you go, whatever comes out comes out.

Unknown speaker 04:30 
I think that um, the key to understanding the power of biology is that all of these things at at all scales are closed loop, goal directed in the cybernetic sense, not in a magical sort of supernatural sense, but in the in the cybernetic sense, uh, goal directed agents that um, are able to detect error from specific set points and are doing their best in terms of using energy and sometimes actually very clever um, kinds of policies to achieve specific goals in specific problem spaces.

Unknown speaker 04:47 
And I think scaling that up gets us to gets us much further than emergence alone.Interesting.

Unknown speaker 04:59 
So I read a book by Douglas Hofstadter called the Strange Loop and he has this idea of um, all sorts of interesting causal relations between the scales.

Unknown speaker 05:00 
And this is something that I find it a bit difficult to get my head around.

Unknown speaker 05:00 
So, you know, the the

Unknown speaker 05:00 
andforexample

Unknown speaker 05:01 
is an emergent phenomenon and we have this thing called agency and I I direct my hand and I tell my hand to move.

Unknown speaker 05:07 
But if everything does emerge from the lower level domain, how does that work?

Unknown speaker 05:14 
How do you get these feedback mechanisms?

Unknown speaker 05:15 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 05:15 
Well, a couple of things, uh, first of all, uh, you know, this this notion of um, uh, reducibility to the lower to the lower level.

Unknown speaker 05:25 
So, so for for a really long time, for centuries, this was a philosophical debate in that people could argue, uh, there were there were reductionists and they would say, well, ultimately everything's reducible and people would say, no, no, there's strong emergence and things happen at the top.

Unknown speaker 05:39 
Um, the amazing thing to me is that this debate has been actually moved from the area of philosophy to the area of mathematics and rigorous science by people like Giulio Tononi and Eric Hole, who have actually, uh, produced, uh, new advances in information theory where you can actually calculate which level of your system does the most work.

Unknown speaker 05:59 
It is no longer up for philosophical debate.

Unknown speaker 06:00 
You can actually do the calculations.

Unknown speaker 06:08 
So there are literally, um, there's a there's a software toolkit that you can use and for a given.

Unknown speaker 06:11 
And and sometimes you will find out that yes, indeed, it is reducible to the lower level.

Unknown speaker 06:12 
And if for other systems you find out that actually, no, the higher levels do more work, more causal work than the lower levels.

Unknown speaker 06:18 
And this has been, this has been obvious in in biology, I think for for a really long time because we as a we we as scientists and engineers, other organisms and in fact, the evolutionary process itself, uh, uses higher level, um, control knobs, exploits them very significantly, the kind of things that we we, for example, study as membrane voltage.

Unknown speaker 06:42 
So resting potential is a kind of aggregate course grading of of the positions of the individual ions, but you get much further in terms of regenerative medicine and other applications if you track the voltage, not the molecular details of the ions.

Unknown speaker 06:59 
It actually, it actually helps you do new experiments, produce therapeutics, uh, by tracking this this this high level thing that that that a reductionist might say doesn't even exist in the first place.

Unknown speaker 07:06 
So I think, so I think these higher levels absolutely have have causal power.

Unknown speaker 07:09 
And the way that uh I would put this um strange loop idea and I think I think, you know, Hofstadter has many um kind of ingenious concepts in his various books.

Unknown speaker 07:29 
Um, the way the way I would put the strange loop idea is like this.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
Many of the things we are interested in.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
So, so so memory, cognition, um, all all all all these kinds of things.

Unknown speaker 08:00 
in in my framework, I have a particular framework for thinking about these things and my framework are observer dependent.So when you have a particular system, the claim that it occupies some level along this this continuum of agency.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
And I do think it's a continuum, it's not binary.
Uh, the claim that it occupies some particular um place along that continuum is an observer relevant relative claim.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
In other words, it's not an objective fact about it.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
It's it's here's an observer, that observer can formulate some some particular model of this thing.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
Um, uh, as a as a as a as a cognitive agent at some level of sophistication, there's a different observer that has a different model.

Unknown speaker 08:14 
and each of them can interact with that system well or poorly to the extent that their model allows.

Unknown speaker 08:19 
And so where you get the uh where you get the strange loop is that the observer, which is necessary to define all you know, things like problem spaces and the goals, these are all observer dependent.

Unknown speaker 08:30 
The observer might be the system itself.

Unknown speaker 08:32 
So, so when you get the real the real boot up of agency comes when the system becomes its own observer and starts to make internal models of its own parts and and models that help it uh control itself and its all in its own lower levels when the higher levels start to control the lower levels.Yes, and that's somewhat reminiscent of Carl Friston.

Unknown speaker 08:53 
uh free energy principle and the concept of a Markov blanket and being able to predict external states probabilistically.

Unknown speaker 08:55 
But yeah, there's two things you said there.

Unknown speaker 08:56 
So first of all, um this notion of things at different levels of the emergence ladder doing different amounts of work.

Unknown speaker 09:01 
And that suggests to me of a kind of form of strong emergence, which is an affront on physicalism.

Unknown speaker 09:02 
So, um, I wondered if you could pick up on on that.

Unknown speaker 09:03 
And and the other thing you said in terms of this observer relative thing, that gets rather to this kind of ultra relativistic or even, you know, like in the Wickensteinian sense of or the Putnam sense that you can take any computation.

Unknown speaker 09:44 
represent it in any physical system.

Unknown speaker 09:46 
And the kind of the meaning of that computation is in its use, so it doesn't really have any agency or valence in of itself.

Unknown speaker 09:55 
Uh, yeah, yeah, so um,I think that uh, well, the so so the first question first, I guess, um, it's only in a front on physicalism if you assume from the beginning that physicalism has to be ultimately reductive.

Unknown speaker 09:22 
So, I I I I don't believe that to be the case, and so I'm I'm I'm okay with with a certain kind of physicalism that does um, that does real justice to the fact that uh, and and they think, you know,

Unknown speaker 10:09 
and Miguel Christ says this.

Unknown speaker 10:11 
He says, uh, you know, a lot of physicists under, uh,

Unknown speaker 10:14 
really, really underestimate matter.

Unknown speaker 10:16 
Matter is amazing and it does some amazing things.

Unknown speaker 10:18 
And when you say, well, that can't be, you know, matter, you know, that that can't just be matter, you're not understanding what what matters actually capable of.

Unknown speaker 10:25 
And I think if we, uh, take, take seriously the fact that, yeah, it can be matter.

Unknown speaker 10:27 
And also higher levels, uh, of organization can do work that is not apparent at lower levels.

Unknown speaker 10:29 
I think that's totally compatible.

Unknown speaker 10:30 
Um, and I'm sorry, I forgot what was the second part?

Unknown speaker 10:31 
The second question?

Unknown speaker 10:32 
Uh, the um, the observer relativity.

Unknown speaker 10:33 
So let's say the, yeah.

Unknown speaker 10:34 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 10:36 
Yeah, I think, I think that get, I think that's that's pretty necessary.

Unknown speaker 10:39 
I think that gets you very far actually because, uh,

Unknown speaker 10:40 
a lot of times we get stuck in these pseudo problems when you try to make objective claims, um, about this area.

Unknown speaker 10:46 
You get into real problems where that that resolve once you specify from whose vantage point are these things true or false.

Unknown speaker 10:54 
And so you get into this observer relativity, but I think it's really, it's really critical to say that the system itself is also a valid observer.

Unknown speaker 11:02 
So it's not just that, well, you have no meaning of your own, it's up to us to interpret you.

Unknown speaker 11:07 
I mean, we can interpret you, but you can also interpret yourself and you're not dependent on, you're not dependent on external observers to define these things for you.

Unknown speaker 11:15 
You are also a bonafide observer.

Unknown speaker 11:16 
But I do think and this is work that we've done with Chris Fields, um, the role of an observer in all of these things, I think in the end is is really critical.

Unknown speaker 11:26 
Wonderful.

Unknown speaker 11:27 
Um, Arena, thank you so much for joining us today.

Unknown speaker 11:30 
Thank you.

Unknown speaker 11:30 
Thank you and uh, yeah, really good to see both of you.

Unknown speaker 11:34 
And uh, I'm also looking forward to uh, seeing Michael's talk at the workshop that we're running next week at the Triple A conference.

Unknown speaker 11:44 
So, uh, yeah, I joined a bit late, uh, so were specific questions you were kind of, uh, discussing, well, I just caught the last one.

Unknown speaker 11:54 
Uh, anything.

Unknown speaker 11:55 
Well, um, so we just did, um, I'm really interested in the, um, the rungs of the emergence ladder and how different rungs do different amounts of work.

Unknown speaker 12:00 
They have complex causal relationships between them.

Unknown speaker 12:02 
Is it an a front an a front on physicalism and reductionism?

Unknown speaker 12:13 
And we're also talking about this very slippery notion of agency and where do you draw the boundary and if if you can draw a boundary.

Unknown speaker 12:23 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 12:30 
continuum.

Unknown speaker 12:31 
I think that it's uh, well, like I call it a persuadability continuum, but it's basically,

Unknown speaker 12:35 
it it really is a continuum of agency and I don't think there are any sharp boundaries. I think sharp categories are what we as observers bring to an underlying continuous phenomenon and we can

Unknown speaker 12:46 
we can try to impose categorical boundaries on things that make it easier for us to do specific things, but the underlying phenomena I think are are completely continuous.

Unknown speaker 12:55 
I I do agree with that and yet um, there is a notion of transitions in certain metrics of behavior.

Unknown speaker 13:05 
Uh, I'm talking purely from kind of practical examples say in behavior of large scale um, say AI systems, neural networks.

Unknown speaker 13:16 
So we know and that's been observed recently, so that with say scaling the amount of data or moral, you might for a while still not be able to do certain task well.

Unknown speaker 13:25 
And then at some particular kind of critical size, something happens and model suddenly like grocks it.

Unknown speaker 13:35 
So this grocking behavior have been observed over and over in the past like year.

Unknown speaker 13:40 
And so in large scale machine learning models, which is essentially kind of emergence of certain ability.

Unknown speaker 13:49 
And well, I mean, it is still continuous, but there is a change in the slope and the change can be quite dramatic.

Unknown speaker 13:56 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 13:57 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 14:00 
So, yeah, so in a sense, it also resonates with other examples where transitions were happening uh, in AI, but not necessarily in machine learning, going all the way back to good old like uh, satisfiability problems or constraint satisfaction problems,

Unknown speaker 14:10 
uh, in general, even other NP hard problems like discrete problems, where you may have a network of variables or nodes that can take different values and you're trying to uh, basically increase uh, the density in terms of number of constraint and see what happens.

Unknown speaker 14:19 
And the property of being satisfiable problem to unsatisfiable changes continually, but that probability experiences sharp drop at certain critical value uh, say number of constraints at the system divided by the number of variables.

Unknown speaker 15:00 
undergo like uh

Unknown speaker 15:01 
state of better transitions, whatever, the water to solid and vice versa.

Unknown speaker 15:07 
And similar like for magnetics, when the temperature increases and the ferromagnetic basically stops being magnetic.

Unknown speaker 15:15 
And the analogy was made in some cases quite clearly with those AI problems, their properties and those transitions in them.

Unknown speaker 15:24 
It also kind of relates closely to like random graph theory, there is a famous old theorem by Fred Good, that if you consider random graph and say P is probability that there is an edge in that graph, and that probability keeps increasing, when it's zero, the graph is fully disconnected, no links at all.

Unknown speaker 15:34 
If it's one, everything is connected, it's complete graph, in the middle, say if you look at connectedness of a graph as a property, what's the probability that from any point you can get to any other point and there is a pass, that's what means graph is connected.

Unknown speaker 15:49 
That property, its probability again sharply goes from zero to one around certain critical value of that parameter.

Unknown speaker 16:12 
And then any other property, what was the beauty of that result, any property doesn't have to be connectivity, that's monotonic in edge addition, will have a phase transition.

Unknown speaker 16:22 
So, though it's continuous change, the shape of it is highly non-linear.

Unknown speaker 16:29 
Yeah, yeah, so that's super interesting.

Unknown speaker 16:30 
Uh and of course, of course, there are many phenomena in in physics and and in math that that that show this kind of non-linear change and and that's fine.

Unknown speaker 16:39 
Um, I'm interested in how sharp it really is and and in particular in the cases that you talked about because what happens in biology is that uh people will sort of they they look at the adult and or let's say a human and they say, okay, this human has true cognition and you know, real, real, you know, hopes and dreams and whatnot.

Unknown speaker 16:46 
Then they look at the at the one cell, I'm you know, one cell egg at fertilization, they say, wow, that's just a chemical system.

Unknown speaker 17:03 
And so the theory is that at some point, right, so people assume that at some point there's some sort of phase transition and a lot of people will talk about this phase transition, but if you really uh dig into this and ask them to specify, so so what is that phase transition, right?

Unknown speaker 17:29 
So, so at this moment, boom, so so that

Unknown speaker 17:30 
that that that thing move from here.

Unknown speaker 17:31 
Ah, now we have this like crazy, you know, large transition and it's it's actually quite smooth even though people tend to assume there must be some kind of face transition.

Unknown speaker 17:41 
And so I wonder just out of curiosity because I I'm not super familiar with the examples that you're talking about, if you were to zoom in, right?

Unknown speaker 17:46 
So let's just magnify.
So so clearly you have some sort of sigmoid, so now we're we're sort of zooming in.

Unknown speaker 17:52 
How sharp is it actually?
Is there an atomic operation where I add one edge to this graph and bam, now now I'm somewhere else, like how sharp is it really?

Unknown speaker 18:03 
Uh, yeah, so just like phase transitions in statistical physics, uh, the sharpness increases with the size of the system.

Unknown speaker 18:12 
Say you have any finite size graph, transition is, well, your sigmoid, when you grow the size of this graph, say you grow that satisfiability problem or whatever.

Unknown speaker 18:24 
Uh, the transition becomes sharper and sharper.
So in the limit, when the system is infinite, that basically the exponent diverges.

Unknown speaker 18:34 
Yeah, so it is getting sharper.
So yeah, in in empirical results, people were kind of doing in constraint satisfaction problem, satisfiability problems while ago and random graphs, that was happening indeed.

Unknown speaker 18:43 
So as essentially in similar physical system, sharpness depends on the size of the model and or the number of uh, I don't know, units, particles, variables, nodes, while the critical parameter is another thing, uh, and at the same value of that critical parameter, like for example, ratio between constraints and variables, uh, the transition happens and then all the pictures indeed were that you see sharper and sharper or increasing number of variables in that problem.

Unknown speaker 19:25 
So in a sense, yeah, it behaved pretty much just like it was supposed to behave with certain physical phenomena, uh, like uh, yeah, phases of uh, states of matter, for example, or ferromagnetics, like Ising models.

Unknown speaker 19:42 
Yeah, so it's not always like that.
I'm not seeing uh, well, of course, people try to exercise caution when they see rapid improvement in uh, performance of machine learning models, for example, GPT3, on particular tasks like arithmetic, uh, it was observed.

Unknown speaker 20:00 
that while on

Unknown speaker 20:01 
other tasks and just on measuring how their loss function during training behaves.

Unknown speaker 20:07 
It's used to be like quite common to observe power loss.

Unknown speaker 20:12 
And that was a famous chariot couples and his colleagues from Open AI paper or now basically the scaling loss behavior in the language models and then they found in other modalities.

Unknown speaker 20:25 
Anyway, so it's a whole field.
Uh, power laws kind of ruled for a year or so.

Unknown speaker 20:30 
And there are people started digging into more complex behaviors because for certain tasks, like as I said, arithmetic or any

Unknown speaker 20:38 
discrete operation that can be described as a table.

Unknown speaker 20:43 
Uh, people discovered that GPT3 may not do that task well until certain size and after certain size of the model, it rapidly improves its performance.

Unknown speaker 20:56 
Another example was that so-called grocking paper, also it was in the IC clear workshop paper, I think was from Open AI, where they by mistake, uh, just left model running and training on the data multiple books.

Unknown speaker 21:11 
So they were not really scaling model or data, but just let it run.
So compute was growing.

Unknown speaker 21:17 
And it wasn't doing well, the accuracy was kind of low, and at some point it suddenly later on they saw when they looked at their uh, process they forgot to kill.

Unknown speaker 21:29 
They looked at it kind of grocked the problem and at some point it suddenly improved uh, first training loss and then test loss.

Unknown speaker 21:38 
Now, there are multiple groups very actively kind of studying this phenomenon.

Unknown speaker 21:41 
We got very interested back in the I guess September 2021 and submitted a paper just now.

Unknown speaker 21:49 
Um, Max Tegmark's group worked on that and they have some papers now.

Unknown speaker 21:55 
Um, Jacob Steinhardt from Berkeley, they just had accepted paper.
Okay.

Unknown speaker 22:00 
So anyway, people very much got interested in grocking behavior.
Not necessarily this specific example, but in general, when parameter of interest, which might be critical,

Unknown speaker 22:14 
increases on the x-axis, it could be a compute, data size, model size, perhaps something else.

Unknown speaker 22:16 
And then you have whatever performance metric on Y axis, it could be accuracy, could be loss, could be something else.
And trying to understand when those sharp changes may happen and how sharp they are.

Unknown speaker 22:33 
So, so we recently actually got this paper at I clear, uh, with my collaborators with

Unknown speaker 22:42 
the first author is Ethan Cabalero and the second author and uh,

Unknown speaker 22:48 
basically trying to fit all these strange behaviors with one functional form.
It's so-called broken neural scaling loss paper.

Unknown speaker 22:58 
because it's much richer behavior than previously assumed just power loss.
And those sharp transitions or not so sharp transitions or but transitions may happen.

Unknown speaker 23:08 
So, it would be really interesting to understand better when and why behavior may change.
So, this broken neural scaling loss was just trying to do it as a black box, looking at the system from outside and trying to statistically predict where it happens, but many people also look inside, trying to understand what dynamics of solutions can possibly lead to and can allow you to predict what's about to happen.

Unknown speaker 24:41 
yeah, no, I think I think it's I think it's super interesting and and and of course, uh,

Unknown speaker 24:46 
I mean, I'm not doubting that these things exist.
I what I don't know is to what extent these are good models for what goes on in the biology, because the biology seems to be quite continuous, right?
So these may be two different.

Unknown speaker 25:00 
two different ways to to to look at this.

Unknown speaker 25:02 
And um, and also my sort of big the the the reason I

Unknown speaker 25:04 
emphasize the continuity is not that I want to minimize the importance of um great transitions because I do think of course there are great transitions.

Unknown speaker 25:16 
uh in behavior.

Unknown speaker 25:17 
Um, I what I want to do is emphasize the continuity of substrate because because a lot of uh the

Unknown speaker 25:26 
the discourse, you know, the the the human does this and the human does that and they say, okay, so so which which which kind of human like how far back.

Unknown speaker 25:34 
And you can do this in in evolutionary scale, you can do it in developmental scale, right?

Unknown speaker 25:42 
But eventually you you follow the human back and you end up with a single cell.

Unknown speaker 25:42 
And we just have to deal with the fact that there is no magic bright line that somebody can draw, okay, boom, at this at this point in the embryonic development like that's it.

Unknown speaker 25:52 
Now, and so and so what we have to understand, of course, there can be there can be um uh uh non

Unknown speaker 26:00 
monotonic uh you know, non linear changes and all that.

Unknown speaker 26:03 
But but but but it's a transformation of the exact same substrate.

Unknown speaker 26:13 
It isn't it isn't something magical that gets added at some particular point that and then everything.

Unknown speaker 26:13 
So, so I'm you know, I'm sort of all about that aspect of continuity.

Unknown speaker 26:19 
It doesn't have to be linear per se, but but we have to come to grips.

Unknown speaker 26:20 
people who think that that it's crazy to attribute, you know, they say it's anthropomorphic to attribute um certain kinds of uh cognitive claims to a single cell.

Unknown speaker 26:31 
they owe a story, a very specific story of how you get from a single cell to a human.

Unknown speaker 26:35 
You can't simply say that well, you know, uh uh there's some magic that happens in the middle.

Unknown speaker 26:36 
You actually have to lay out uh what is it, what's the, you know, what's the phase transition actually.

Unknown speaker 26:40 
And people sort of assume there is one, but I've never heard of one.

Unknown speaker 26:41 
I've never heard of a good one.

Unknown speaker 26:42 
And so and so it's quite interesting to me that these that these do come up in the in the um in the machine learning world.

Unknown speaker 26:46 
It's interesting these to come up.

Unknown speaker 26:50 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 26:56 
But there is still continuity because, yeah, I mean, you essentially, well, to some extent, the X-axis is, well, not exactly maybe absolutely continually growing the size, but for all practical purposes.

Unknown speaker 27:16 
So the curves are usually always continuous.

Unknown speaker 27:17 
There's no discontinuous jumps.

Unknown speaker 27:18 
But continuity is kind of different indeed speed of development.

Unknown speaker 27:23 
those things change and uh, yeah, but I I basically agree with your point completely that there is no magic source or ingredient, well, unless you believe in divine intervention or something like that.

Unknown speaker 27:36 
But yeah, if you kind of keep this hypothesis as more complicated and prefer simpler based on just things you observe, then indeed there is there is continuum of intelligence from human and back to the cell, uh, but then of course a good question is like if you start decomposing cell and go deep inside.

Unknown speaker 28:02 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 28:03 
Then what?

Unknown speaker 28:03 
So, so, yeah, so we and other people have have looked at this and in fact, if you look at something as as as um ostensibly uh mechanical as a gene regulatory network, right?

Unknown speaker 28:15 
So you just look at a model of genes into turning each other on and off.

Unknown speaker 28:18 
Uh, we and and and others have shown that that kind of thing is capable of six different kinds of learning including associative conditioning, just just from the dynamical systems properties of the gene regulation, nothing else.

Unknown speaker 28:32 
So, there are and now I was just looking today, there's apparently a literature on um uh chemotaxis in individual molecules.

Unknown speaker 28:40 
and right, which uh I I mean, I mean, uh some of these think.

Unknown speaker 28:44 
I mean, I mean, uh some of these think to be the individual molecules, right?

Unknown speaker 28:47 
And so and and and then you can go below that and the kind of stuff that we've we've done with Carl Friston and Chris Fields and really start looking at very fundamental particle interactions as having sort of uh extremely um uh uh kind of primitive levels of uh non-zero competencies.

Unknown speaker 29:08 
So, so that's it's a really good question, right?

Unknown speaker 29:09 
If you have a continuum, so the question is, is there a zero, right?

Unknown speaker 29:13 
Is there is there anything.

Unknown speaker 29:13 
And you know, and and Chris and I have talked about this and um because because my claim is is this.

Unknown speaker 29:24 
If you think about what would the absolute minimum of intelligence look like, right?

Unknown speaker 29:25 
Like what's the what's the absolute minimum.

Unknown speaker 29:26 
And so to me, I I would if I had to come up with the absolute minimum, I would I would lean on two things.

Unknown speaker 29:27 
I would say, I say the first thing is uh some level of uh of goal directedness, some ability to pursue a particular outcome out of a set of other outcomes.

Unknown speaker 29:31 
And we have this in um least action principles and in even in particles.

Unknown speaker 29:32 
And then and then some level of indeterminacy such that local conditions don't fully determine what this thing's going to do.

Unknown speaker 29:37 
And we have that in particles.

Unknown speaker 29:37 
And so I would claim that it doesn't actually.

Unknown speaker 30:00 
bottom

Unknown speaker 30:01 
out at zero even at the atomic scale.

Unknown speaker 30:03 
And so I said to Chris one day, um, could we have a world with no least action laws, that where where it literally would be zero.

Unknown speaker 30:10 
And he his he what he said was uh, yes, but it would have to be a universe in which nothing ever happened.

Unknown speaker 30:16 
So it would have to be a completely static universe that one one that in which things happen.

Unknown speaker 30:21 
You're going to be able to to derive some sort of um, least action kind of thing which looks like the basement of cognition to me.

Unknown speaker 30:32 
Yeah, very interesting.

Unknown speaker 30:36 
So it was always kind of an open question how to link these to what people are say doing right now, developing uh, like artificial neural networks and those systems, uh, basically how that would translate in the AI domain, what would it mean for this modeling, like can we, and they, well, I mean, I think people did try to define, um, intelligence and its units, although it's not something that people commonly use.

Unknown speaker 31:10 
I wouldn't claim that there were no such attempts.

Unknown speaker 31:12 
But nevertheless, I mean, we're still not really doing that.

Unknown speaker 31:18 
Uh, and uh, here and there people say we probably should be measuring uh, more formally what we want from our model in terms of intelligence and like how those things compare and like, how those things compare.

Unknown speaker 31:30 
And can you say that it's as intelligent as like that type of the organism or this or yeah, so some basically making this whole engineering field a bit more of a science like, well, physics or even biology in terms of.

Unknown speaker 31:47 
In order to make claim that something is intelligent, would be at least good to define it more formally, again, going back to physics and have some notion of units or something.

Unknown speaker 31:55 
So you can say that in that units, you can say this is larger than that.

Unknown speaker 32:06 
Yeah, yeah.

Unknown speaker 32:11 
Yeah, so so Chris and I tackled this in a in a recent paper starting off with the idea that making claims about something the intelligence of something is really taking an IQ test ourselves, because you have to be smart enough to to to to pick a problem space and identify the the uh, the degree of cleverness of the policy that the system is following in that space and and and and you may not see it, right?

Unknown speaker 32:23 
It's not obvious that we can always detect it.

Unknown speaker 32:30 
And so in biology, we are very used to seeing mid-sized objects moving at medium speeds in three-dimensional space and saying, oh, look at, well, you know, we'll look at what that crow is doing, that's intelligent.

Unknown speaker 32:36 
But there are other spaces, right?

Unknown speaker 32:59 
So physiological space, metabolic space, transcriptional space, um, anatomical morph space, which my lab studies.

Unknown speaker 33:02 
Uh, cells and tissues do amazing things in those spaces that are absolutely, if if if that if they they navigate those spaces in a way that if we had a robot or an autonomous vehicle doing that, this would be off the charts performance.

Unknown speaker 33:11 
And and and it's not in the it's not in the domain of classical three-dimensional behavior, it's it's behavior in these other spaces and learning to recognize that is very hard for us, because as humans, all of our sense organs sort of tend to point outwards.

Unknown speaker 33:21 
If you had a if you had a an innate feeling of your blood chemistry, you would know without a doubt that your liver and your kidneys were intelligent because you could, you would see how they navigate that space.

Unknown speaker 33:31 
You could, you would directly feel it the way that we currently see each other and say, oh, that's pretty clever, you know.

Unknown speaker 33:40 
So, so, so, so what we try to do is to lay out, um, and this was, this was, it goes back to like the 40s, you know, Wiener and Rosenbluth had this, this scale, right?

Unknown speaker 33:50 
Of of from all the way from passive materials all the way up to second order like, um, you know, metacognition and whatnot and everything in between, the kinds of competency that different systems have in navigating these spaces.

Unknown speaker 33:59 
And one way to do it is.

Unknown speaker 35:00 
you get to find out what it actually knows how to do.

Unknown speaker 35:02 
And then you can form specific hypotheses, does it, you know, how far ahead can it plan?

Unknown speaker 35:06 
Does it see?

Unknown speaker 35:08 
Does it have a memory?

Unknown speaker 35:09 
Does it, you know, you can but the way you find out is by challenging all these things.

Unknown speaker 35:12 
And, you know, like um, like the frog face example and and and many other things, you find you you you find out that these things are actually way more clever than than they seem at first, you know?

Unknown speaker 35:24 
Yeah, I definitely remember how you gave that talk in December 2013 at Neurips, what bodies think about and the message to people studying neural networks that yeah, intelligence was there way before the first neuron appeared.

Unknown speaker 35:43 
So, maybe we should look, but still the common part was networks.

Unknown speaker 35:48 
They doesn't have to be neural, they don't have to be neural, but like essentially, yeah, I I do remember all these experiments were essentially about changing the network communication so that the organism as a whole or the part of it changes its form to whatever you kind of wanted it to be.

Unknown speaker 36:07 
But I think even if we scratch neural from that, the key essence of kind of phenomenon will be always network.

Unknown speaker 36:19 
I mean, I would I would yes, but I would extend that to say that it can't be a single level of of um of organization, right?

Unknown speaker 36:28 
So, so in biology, the trick is that every network is a network of networks and each one is as goal directedness.

Unknown speaker 36:36 
So every every level is trying to accomplish specific things in specific spaces and they all cooperate or compete with each other.

Unknown speaker 36:43 
So, uh, you know, this is this is another talk that I give sometimes why it's called why robots don't get cancer, right?

Unknown speaker 36:58 
Why why why don't why don't our robotics get cancer?

Unknown speaker 37:04 
And and and it's it's because they're not made of parts that have the capacity to go off on their own and do their own thing.

Unknown speaker 37:10 
In biology, every single part is basically being held against its will by the level above.

Unknown speaker 37:13 
So everything, if you were to just like release the top levels goal directedness, the parts would go off and do other things.

Unknown speaker 37:14 
And sometimes they do and and we get phenotypes like cancer.

Unknown speaker 37:16 
I I I remember really well the for this uh five hour discussion in the IBM research cafeteria in New York town a few years ago and the other really very insightful making analogy between kind of the cell going cancerous or coming back to its senses and essentially the notion of at what scale the objective of the cell to survive and thrive is applied.

Unknown speaker 37:43 
Because yeah, if you're a single cell in the environment, you treat it as a source of food, it's environment, right?

Unknown speaker 37:59 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 38:09 
But if you become part of the organism, yeah, you're under pressure to behave in the best interest of organism.

Unknown speaker 38:10 
If you forget about that due to changes in your communication with other members of organism society, then you start acting selfishly and to bad, that's cancer.

Unknown speaker 38:11 
Could could I could I put a quick question to to Michael because you you've I'm very interested in the definition of intelligence.

Unknown speaker 38:16 
and you're saying words like uh goal directedness, um agents, planning, and these terms are a little bit anthropomorphic.

Unknown speaker 38:27 
you could argue that they are universal primitives and you're also talking along the lines of intelligence being almost like uh you know, some people describe it as as capability or with an underlying principle.

Unknown speaker 38:37 
But it's almost like it's a continuum and there are people who believe that humans are special.

Unknown speaker 38:57 
We think, you know, the the behaviorists thought that it was just a very simple stimulus response.

Unknown speaker 39:00 
The monkeys don't have a flash of inspiration, they don't plan how to get the banana.

Unknown speaker 39:03 
We have something different.

Unknown speaker 39:08 
What do you think?

Unknown speaker 39:19 
Well, uh, I I I'm I'm I'm certainly not saying that we don't think or that there is no material difference between us and and let's say a paramecium.

Unknown speaker 39:20 
So the the differences are of course real.

Unknown speaker 39:21 
I I I insist on one thing and then and then I have hypotheses about other stuff.

Unknown speaker 39:24 
The the thing that I insist on is that uh when we make a um a claim about the level of cognition of some system, real artificial, you know, evolved artificial, whatever.

Unknown speaker 39:34 
You cannot make those claims from an armchair, you have to do experiments.

Unknown speaker 39:49 
And so you cannot have feelings about this stuff.

Unknown speaker 39:59 
People say to me all the time, oh, well, you know, about the xenobots, well, it's frog skin, that can't X, Y, Z, you know, you name it, whatever.

Unknown speaker 40:00 
Yeah, it can.

Unknown speaker 40:00 
I say, well, how did you arrive at this conclusion?

Unknown speaker 40:00 
You cannot just have feelings about this stuff, you have to do experiments.

Unknown speaker 40:00 
and see what happens.

Unknown speaker 40:01 
And the thing and and

Unknown speaker 40:02 
to to to to find out.

Unknown speaker 40:04 
So, so in order to make a an intelligence claim, you need a couple things.

Unknown speaker 40:07 
You need to pick a space within which you think it's solving problems, right?

Unknown speaker 40:11 
So, so you as the observer have to make, have to say,

Unknown speaker 40:13 
I think this is the space in which it works.

Unknown speaker 40:16 
Then you have to say, here is the goal, I think this thing is pursuing in a in a cybernetic sense.

Unknown speaker 40:20 
And then you have to say, and now I have a hypothesis about how clever this is, what can it do?

Unknown speaker 40:33 
Can it go around obstacles?

Unknown speaker 40:40 
Is it trapped by local minima?

Unknown speaker 40:41 
Does it have path history?

Unknown speaker 40:42 
Does it have this, that?

Unknown speaker 40:43 
You make some sort of, some sort of claim.

Unknown speaker 40:44 
Having made those three claims, we can then empirically see how well does that work out for you?

Unknown speaker 40:55 
What does that enable you to do?

Unknown speaker 41:00 
And so then, then multiple observers, so, so someone can come along and say,

Unknown speaker 41:01 
you're crazy, this thing doesn't have any of that.

Unknown speaker 41:08 
Somebody else can say, oh no, it's actually much more clever than that.

Unknown speaker 41:10 
And then we all interact with the system and we see who wins.

Unknown speaker 41:11 
It's an it's it's an empirical question that has to be put.

Unknown speaker 41:12 
So the only thing that that I insist on is that uh this charge of anthropomorphism, um,

Unknown speaker 41:13 
it has to be quite specific.

Unknown speaker 41:14 
I we have to make a specific claim.

Unknown speaker 41:15 
What do we think this thing is able to do?

Unknown speaker 41:16 
And then we get to find out.

Unknown speaker 41:17 
Is is that a useful lens onto the system or not?

Unknown speaker 41:19 
Okay, but just a quick follow up.

Unknown speaker 41:21 
I mean, what, what is a go?

Unknown speaker 41:22 
Because a goal feels like it's a wicked form of reductionism along the lines of we what we were talking about before.

Unknown speaker 41:23 
And even it because you know, Shane Leg has this idea that the definition of intelligence is an agent being able to um solve a variety of tasks in different environments and so on.

Unknown speaker 41:37 
Uh, I I don't believe that there is an objective goal that is intelligible in the sense that we get to discover it once and for all and then we're done.

Unknown speaker 41:46 
I think that when when somebody says uh that this system has a particular goal, what they're saying is they have discovered a a lens, a perspective on the behavior, such that um, positiving that it has a goal and some set of competencies to reach that goal, gives you increased ability to predict and control that system.

Unknown speaker 42:05 
So, so, so, so we come across a thermostat.

Unknown speaker 42:06 
And um, you look at this thing and uh, you know, you're you're a reductionist and you say, well, okay, uh, I can sort of calculate what what all the particles are doing and that's great.

Unknown speaker 42:19 
And I look at it and say, I see this and this and I think this is the set point.

Unknown speaker 42:20 
And you say, there's no such thing as a set point.

Unknown speaker 42:21 
There's just atoms and the thing.

Unknown speaker 42:22 
And I say, well, well, here's the thing though.

Unknown speaker 42:23 
I I I will exert much less energy and and effort in changing the temperature of the room, while you're running around pushing on all the individual, you know, atoms of this thing.

Unknown speaker 42:27 
I'm just going to change the set point and let the thing take care of itself.

Unknown speaker 42:28 
So, so the level of what what it affords you is a a more powerful level of um relationship to the system.

Unknown speaker 42:30 
For for simple systems, that's prediction and control.

Unknown speaker 42:31 
For complex systems, that may be uh everything from from training to friendship to who knows, you know, right, for complex systems.

Unknown speaker 42:37 
What we're looking at is um, what level of agency gives me the best interaction with the system.

Unknown speaker 42:45 
And I can I can guess too high, right?

Unknown speaker 42:46 
If I'm standing there arguing, you know, pleading with my thermostat, you know, here are all the reasons you should change, like that's not going to work.

Unknown speaker 42:47 
And at the same time, if if I have a uh a system that's a that's a learning agent, like, you know, a horse or a dog, uh, humans thousands of years ago figured out that you don't need to know the neuroscience of what's between their ears, you can train the thing.

Unknown speaker 42:56 
And right?

Unknown speaker 42:57 
So, so you found an interface that that that allows you to do amazing things because you understood that this is not the same as as a complex, you know, set of bowling balls that that you would have to engineer bottom up.

Unknown speaker 44:29 
Yeah, I I do agree with the point that uh as perhaps uh humans ego would like to think that there is something absolutely special in humans and that's but indeed, I mean, the continuum is there.

Unknown speaker 44:46 
So, and humans developed from something much simpler and they inherited properties of that and uh, yeah, so basically I think I think it's much better probably even for the field over

Unknown speaker 45:00 
artificial

Unknown speaker 45:01 
intelligence, it would be much better to

Unknown speaker 45:05 
look at the intelligence from this

Unknown speaker 45:06 
perspective, rather than from the, well, as you said, Garden of Eden

Unknown speaker 45:10 
type of uniqueness of human abilities.

Unknown speaker 45:15 
or intelligence being just really bound to being human.

Unknown speaker 45:20 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 45:20 
Yeah, I mean, I'm certainly not arguing that that that humans have some interesting capacities that are that are hard or impossible to find elsewhere right now.

Unknown speaker 45:30 
But this this way of thinking about them as natural kinds, as sharp natural kinds, I think is is philosophically really problematic, because biology is so, so I have this diagram that I sort of beat people over the head with and and it's got it's got like a standard human in the center, right?

Unknown speaker 45:46 
And then up above is a is a very um high resolution uh evolutionary series going all the way back to, you know, you name it, some sort of some sort of microbe, right?

Unknown speaker 45:50 
And so whatever you think this human has, you have to tell me where it peters out, like where at what where did you have these two parents that were not whatever, right?

Unknown speaker 45:55 
The gentle, and then bam, they had a child and now the child has, you know, true whatever, right?

Unknown speaker 46:00 
Like where is that line?

Unknown speaker 46:00 
That's impossible.

Unknown speaker 46:01 
Then down below it's got the same sort of thing developmentally, so again, I can take you all the way back to the single cell oocyte, a little pile of chemicals, and you have to tell me where things peter out if they do.

Unknown speaker 46:10 
And then laterally it gets even worse because uh in one direction what you can do is you biology is so interoperable.

Unknown speaker 46:13 
You can start to make um chimeras and hybrids between biological tissues and uh and and machines.

Unknown speaker 46:18 
So we can make you I can have over here somebody that's uh you know, 99% human and a little bit of, you know, chips in the brain, right?

Unknown speaker 46:26 
Uh with some AI.

Unknown speaker 46:27 
Over here, it's the opposite, it's 99% Rumba with some human brain cells living in it that sort of are instrumented to it.

Unknown speaker 46:30 
And we can fill in every single point in the middle.

Unknown speaker 46:31 
Every point in the middle is is is occupied by a possible being.

Unknown speaker 46:32 
50/50, you know, 60/30, you you name it, right?

Unknown speaker 46:33 
And and if you're saying this is a machine and this is a human and these are binary categories, then you got a real problem telling me where we're going to shift over, right?

Unknown speaker 46:34 
Where are we going to click over?

Unknown speaker 46:35 
And the same thing with on the biological, the bioengineering.

Unknown speaker 46:36 
And so, so, so here's a human, at some point we're going to want some gills and somebody's going to want a tail and somebody's going to want a third brain hemisphere.

Unknown speaker 46:37 
All of this is completely doable.

Unknown speaker 46:38 
Completely doable.

Unknown speaker 46:39 
And uh we we could we could do much of this to, you know, tomorrow.

Unknown speaker 46:40 
Uh and so, uh then again, you have to tell me

Unknown speaker 47:30 
what's

Unknown speaker 47:30 
what where are they when are they not human anymore.

Unknown speaker 47:33 
I feel like, you know, these these categories are um treating them as as natural kinds is is is limiting more than it is facilitating for for ideas in this field.

Unknown speaker 47:43 
Well, we're very clearly going into transhumanism, which is indeed quite a natural progression because you, yeah, you keep extending your capabilities with any kind of automation or tools, starting from glasses or whatever.

Unknown speaker 48:03 
And yeah, you keep extending yourself, you keep morphing with it and indeed it's a good question like, okay, so yeah, where is the where is the line?

Unknown speaker 48:12 
Then of course, many interesting, controversial questions about that, we probably should not go into that because it's kind of worms about the yeah,

Unknown speaker 48:21 
inside of all the things that we discussed.

Unknown speaker 48:26 
I can only imagine questions coming from that side.

Unknown speaker 48:31 
I I one of my favorite stories I came across is the first guy to use an umbrella in London, right?

Unknown speaker 48:37 
I mean, this was considered scandalous.

Unknown speaker 48:41 
He was pelted with garbage because it was he was upsetting the natural order of things that who who is he not to get wet.

Unknown speaker 48:49 
This is unnatural.

Unknown speaker 48:51 
There was an umbrella.

Unknown speaker 48:52 
And right?

Unknown speaker 48:56 
And so I you know, I didn't know this story.

Unknown speaker 49:04 
I'll definitely use this story in some of my arguments.

Unknown speaker 49:07 
People I I I get I get this from people all the time.

Unknown speaker 49:11 
Oh my God, it's you know, it's it's un you know, it's unnatural.

Unknown speaker 49:22 
Look, natural is terrible.

Unknown speaker 49:23 
Natural is absolutely terrible.

Unknown speaker 49:24 
And and we can do better we can do better than this.

Unknown speaker 49:26 
And and I think that um, you know, all of these all of these things are going to be people are going to people are going to laugh at us in the future, I think.

Unknown speaker 49:31 
Uh thinking about the things that we are concerned with here, the same way that we think of, you know, back in the day, the first person to come up with some crutches or or some, you know, for glasses, I mean, for glasses, uh, you know, this kind of stuff.

Unknown speaker 49:43 
It's just it's just, yeah, I don't know, I don't know.

Unknown speaker 49:46 
No, that's that's a hilarious.

Unknown speaker 49:50 
Plus of inspiration.

Unknown speaker 49:59 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 50:00 
Another argument could be, well, what is really natural?

Unknown speaker 50:00 
Like, if we are natural, and naturally our brains are coming up with those extensions,

Unknown speaker 50:00 
they are they sure all there for as well.

Unknown speaker 50:01 
Sure, sure, sure.

Unknown speaker 50:03 
I think all of this stuff, you know, all of this stuff I think even even in in in very modern, you know, sort of scientific thinkers, a lot of this stuff goes back to a Garden of Eden view.

Unknown speaker 50:14 
Of if it was the case that somebody has prepped all of this for us in the best possible way, then of course, the answer is, hey, you scientists, don't screw it up.

Unknown speaker 50:25 
It's already as good as it's going to be, all you're going to do is make it worse.

Unknown speaker 50:31 
That made sense when people thought that this was all created for us in the best possible way.

Unknown speaker 50:32 
That picture that that story has has crumbled long ago.

Unknown speaker 50:35 
there's no way, I think rationally to look around at um the the health disparities worldwide, the um the the incredible suffering due to disease and aging and everything else, and to say that, well, natural is fantastic.

Unknown speaker 50:46 
Let's just make sure that, okay, natural is horrible.

Unknown speaker 50:51 
And and and up until now, there's been no way to get around it.

Unknown speaker 50:52 
Now, finally, we have, you know, we're we're the adults in the room now, we we we have some of and of course, we're going to mess things up too, of course.

Unknown speaker 51:05 
But but we have now some ability to do better than natural.

Unknown speaker 51:05 
And let's just remember that natural is not someone has prepped this for us, uh, you know, in accordance to our values of happiness, of fulfillment, all that.

Unknown speaker 51:15 
Nobody's done that.

Unknown speaker 51:20 
Evolution uh optimizes for biomass, basically.

Unknown speaker 51:21 
Like that's it.

Unknown speaker 51:21 
That's it.

Unknown speaker 51:21 
It doesn't optimize for intelligence really, it doesn't optimize for happiness, for for any of those things.

Unknown speaker 51:24 
Evolution just makes sure that the next observer is going to observe a bunch of um stuff, you know, running around in in in terms of things.

Unknown speaker 51:33 
That's it.

Unknown speaker 51:33 
That's it.

Unknown speaker 51:33 
Right.

Unknown speaker 51:34 
I I really vividly remember when you first shown the videos versus flat worms, they're probably build platforms by now, and essentially, once you get the 200 or 300 and those kind of uh tractors in the space of the dynamical system, they are they're stable, right?

Unknown speaker 51:51 
They replicate in their CO2 headed, and essentially you see, well, one headed worm was a solution, some local minimum, for all by evolutionary stochastic gradient descent or you name it.

Unknown speaker 52:04 
And it could have been other solution and another solution and some of them may be have lower loss or higher reward or whatever, right?

Unknown speaker 52:13 
So why won't we just look for them?

Unknown speaker 52:16 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 52:17 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 52:18 
Yeah, so that was quite an eye opener.

Unknown speaker 52:21 
Yet, yet, uh, it's very strong bias against transhumanism quite often.

Unknown speaker 52:34 
And um, right.

Unknown speaker 52:37 
Uh, it's understandable because the chances of kind of

Unknown speaker 52:38 
growing things up are definitely non-zero.

Unknown speaker 52:41 
Sure.

Unknown speaker 52:42 
But they are also not 100%.

Unknown speaker 52:44 
Yeah.
I think the difference between people is in their kind of estimation whether their glasses have full or half empty.

Unknown speaker 52:52 
It's also it's that and it's also so so I get a lot of phone calls every week and I get two kinds of phone calls.

Unknown speaker 52:58 
Uh the young healthy people are calling me saying knock this off.
It's like it's it's scary, it's dangerous, whatever.

Unknown speaker 53:06 
The people with various medical problems or with children with medical problems, call me yelling uh what's taking you so long?
Like hurry up.
We we have problems, like we need.

Unknown speaker 53:16 
And so, you know, and and I just always want to like try to connect these people to each other because because, you know, of of yeah, of everything's all well and good until until you need to go to the doctor and then you hope they figured some of this out.

Unknown speaker 53:28 
Uh it's it's, you know, it's all scary until until you need something.

Unknown speaker 53:32 
And and as until something real and much scarier happens to you.

Unknown speaker 53:36 
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And that's true.
Stop being scared of imaginary things.

Unknown speaker 53:40 
Yeah, that's that's yeah, that's that's exactly right.

Unknown speaker 53:44 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 53:45 
And and change, you know, change is scary too and and I and and the interesting thing about about change, the fundamental change is that your values can change.
I I distinctly remember being being a young kid looking at some of the older kids and thinking, wow, uh, you know, and they, you know, they were they, you know, they're dating and all this stuff.

Unknown speaker 53:53 
I'm like, oh my God, I'm going to I'm going to have to it looks it based on what I see here, I'm going to end up like one of them.

Unknown speaker 54:00 
And then I'm just going to be interested in all this kind of crazy stuff that I have zero interest.
This is this is unbelievable.

Unknown speaker 54:03 
Is there a way to like like not do that?

Unknown speaker 54:04 
And and of course, but then of course, once you make that transition, you think, well, that was dumb because now I like all this stuff.

Unknown speaker 54:05 
And and so you can you know, it's it's scary because when you change, the things that are important to you will change.

Unknown speaker 54:10 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 54:10 
Yeah, well, the good thing is once you change, you will not care anymore about the views you had before you changed.

Unknown speaker 54:16 
At least you will go along with that.

Unknown speaker 54:17 
Yes.

Unknown speaker 54:17 
Because yeah, I remember like before I had first child, like everybody would say, oh, now you're going to be crazy busy, you will not have time for work, forget about friends, you'll just have no time for anything.

Unknown speaker 54:20 
And it looked like, oh my gosh, it's awful.
Then you transition and say, well, but they don't care about that stuff anymore.

Unknown speaker 54:23 
I care about this and I'm happy as ever and that's it.

Unknown speaker 54:29 
So, yeah.
Amazing.
Amazing.
Well, um, Professor Michael Levin and Professor Arena Rish.
It's been an absolute honor to have you on today.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Yeah, really.
Thank you so much.
Good to meet you.
See you.
Good, good to see.
