 
 

Unknown speaker 00:00 
I

Unknown speaker 00:01 
had the honor of

Unknown speaker 00:02 
sitting down with Michael Levin, who is working on a paradigm shift in medicine and biology.

Unknown speaker 00:08 
You can inject human oncogenes into a tadpole and they will make tumors.

Unknown speaker 00:12 
And if you do that, but you force the cells into proper electrical state with the communicating with their neighbors, you prevent tumorigenesis even though the oncogene is blazingly strongly expressed.

Unknown speaker 00:24 
Cancer is the second leading cause of death globally.

Unknown speaker 00:28 
And we fight the disease primarily with chemotherapy, radiation or surgery.

Unknown speaker 00:33 
But what if there would be a way to tell cancer cells to stop growing through the use of bioelectricity.

Unknown speaker 00:42 
What you're doing is you're forcing that cell to stay connected to their neighbors, and when when you have a mind melt with a large collective that also says we are building a nice kidney, we are building a skin,

Unknown speaker 00:53 
it's really hard for that cell to have an independent thought of, you know what, I, my goal is to proliferate as much as I can and crawl away wherever life is but right metastasis.

Unknown speaker 01:01 
Okay, so what we want in our bodies is a mind melt of cells.

Unknown speaker 01:06 
That cells forget about their own little ego and start identifying with a larger collective of the organ.

Unknown speaker 01:14 
And the way cells do that is through bioelectricity.

Unknown speaker 01:21 
is what Michael Levin calls a cognitive glue.

Unknown speaker 01:22 
What's actually important about bioelectricity is that it functions as a cognitive glue.

Unknown speaker 01:27 
And what I mean by that is, you know, think of think of how it works in the brain.

Unknown speaker 01:30 
Uh, we are a a giant uh, an enormous collection of individual neurons, and yet those neurons uh, come together in some way to give rise to a new individual that has goals, preferences, memories, uh, and capacities that none of the individual neurons have.

Unknown speaker 01:48 
So basically, we are a collective intelligence of cells held together by bioelectricity.

Unknown speaker 01:54 
Now, what cancer cells do is they disconnect.

Unknown speaker 02:03 
The first thing that happens when oncogenes act,

Unknown speaker 02:04 
first thing they do is they cause electrical uh disconnection from their neighbors.

Unknown speaker 02:07 
And as soon as you disconnected, well now you're an ameba again.

Unknown speaker 02:09 
And as far as you're concerned, the rest of the body is just external environment.

Unknown speaker 02:13 
So that that border between self and world can shrink and grow.

Unknown speaker 02:17 
Now, what's groundbreaking about the work of Michael Levin and his lab is that they found a way to tell cancer cells in frogs to start cooperating again.

Unknown speaker 02:24 
And we've done this in the in the frog model, we've already done this.

Unknown speaker 02:27 
So this stuff uh is not just uh, you know, wishful philosophical thinking and you know, no, no, it has it has very practical implications that if you follow through, you discover therapeutics.

Unknown speaker 02:38 
But things got even more exciting because in bioelectric fields, Michael 11 and his lab found blueprints of organisms.

Unknown speaker 02:46 
So we have now tools where you can literally see, for example, the electric phase.

Unknown speaker 02:50 
this pre pattern that tells you where should the eye go, how many should there be, where should the mouth be, how many heads should a planarian have.

Unknown speaker 02:56 
These are these are states of distributed bioelectrical circuits that are now visible.

Unknown speaker 03:03 
You can you can see them.

Unknown speaker 03:04 
better than being able to see them, you can change them.

Unknown speaker 03:09 
telling it to grow two heads.

Unknown speaker 03:12 
We don't touch the hardware, we don't we don't change the DNA, we don't tell any of the stem cells what to do.

Unknown speaker 03:17 
All of that is taken care of by the system.

Unknown speaker 03:21 
All we do is reset the goals.

Unknown speaker 03:27 
You get to make complex outcomes that nobody could make before because the micro management is to is too hard.

Unknown speaker 03:30 
And this is where we hit on a paradigm shift because normally in biology and medicine, we focus on genes and molecules and managing those.

Unknown speaker 03:36 
You could say we focus on managing the hardware of cells, whereas Michael 11 focuses on the software.

Unknown speaker 03:42 
All there is molecular reactions.

Unknown speaker 03:44 
So if you want uh an extra eye or a worm with two heads, just manage the molecular reactions, that's all you get.

Unknown speaker 03:50 
That that's the conventional view and the implications of that conventional view is that you really need to micromanage all of those chemical reactions to get what you want.

Unknown speaker 03:58 
Now, that's incredibly difficult because because the mapping backwards, if I know what I want, well, what should the what should every gene be doing, what should every cell be doing, what should every molecule be doing, that's really hard.

Unknown speaker 04:09 
In developmental biology, there's the study of morphogenesis, the origin of forms,

Unknown speaker 04:13 
the way how cells organize themselves into shapes and tissues.

Unknown speaker 04:19 
Now, many aspects of morphogenesis still remain a mystery to us.

Unknown speaker 04:24 
No individual cell knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have.

Unknown speaker 04:27 
But the collective absolutely does.

Unknown speaker 04:30 
And that's how you get to things like a salamander limb where you you cut, you know, you can amputate anywhere along the length and the cells will build exactly the right thing.

Unknown speaker 04:40 
And then the most amazing part is they stop when they're done.

Unknown speaker 04:42 
pondering upon 11's work, I asked him where he thinks that the memory of forms in nature is stored.

Unknown speaker 04:51 
Plato and Pythagoras had this idea that uh, there is a platonic space of these kinds of things, of these forms, and

Unknown speaker 05:00 
I

Unknown speaker 05:01 
thinkwe need to take this seriously in that I think one thing that evolution is doing is searching through pointers into that space.

Unknown speaker 05:08 
So I think evolution is not really searching the uh the the horrible complex rugged space of micro states of all the hardware, the phenotypic space.

Unknown speaker 05:17 
I think evolution is actually looking for pointers into this this incredible uh space of forms that already pre-exist.

Unknown speaker 05:24 
Even bacterial biofilms, you know, the very first uh kind of attempts at multicellularity, a kind of weak form of multicellularity, were already using electrical network.Even even individual bacteria living in the network form a kind of collective that does better than the individuals do because it uses bioelectricity to integrate information across space and time.

Unknown speaker 05:47 
A wonderful practical implication of Michael Levin's work could be that in the future we can also in humans tell cancer cells to stop, which would be fantastic.

Unknown speaker 05:58 
But what I find just as important is a deep philosophical lesson his work teaches us, namely that we should do away with all categorical thinking around consciousness and intelligence.

Unknown speaker 06:13 
because it's all a matter of scaling according to Levin and we ourselves could be part of a larger intelligence without knowing it.

Unknown speaker 06:22 
I I certainly think it's possible.

Unknown speaker 06:24 
Um, absolutely, I think it's possible.

Unknown speaker 06:25 
But I think it's very uh important that we don't fall into the trap of, I mean, some people say, that's ridiculous, that's a misuse of the terms, and other people say, oh, absolutely, the whole universe is one giant mind, you know, guy, like, okay, both of those are are hypotheses.

Unknown speaker 06:33 
You cannot decide between those just by sitting in your armchair and deciding which one feels good to you, you need to do experiments, and obviously on the higher level, you know, on the level of the universe, the level of the solar system, I can think of how to do those experiments, but they're not practical.

Unknown speaker 06:53 
They're a little you know, a dialogue at one point between two two neurons in the in a brain.

Unknown speaker 06:57 
And one neuron, one neuron is is kind of like the hard-headed materialist and he says, look, uh, we we live in a cold, unfeeling universe.

Unknown speaker 07:00 
There's no pattern, there's no nobody cares about us.

Unknown speaker 07:01 
It's just, you know, it's just each one of us is is alone.

Unknown speaker 07:02 
And the other one's a little bit mystical and he says, I don't know, I have this feeling that that we're part of some system that actually, you know, the universe actually learns and wants things and does and and the value crazy, you know, and there's no, I don't know, there's like these patterns of, you know, of of propagate like back propagating error and whatever and sometimes, you know, the universe punishes me and and whatever, but I feel like there's a there's a

Unknown speaker 08:00 
the purpose behind it and he's just, ah, that's crazy.So, so, right?
So from the perspective of of of in in that system, the the mystical neuron is is correct.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
Welcome to the Essentia Foundation's YouTube channel.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
If you're new to our channel, may I ask you to like and subscribe as it really helps us to grow and make more content like this.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
Now, without further ado, here is my full conversation with Michael Levin.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
You've been able to tell organisms, Planaria, and to grow two heads, right?
Uh, by cracking the code.

Unknown speaker 07:30 
Um, and not only did they listen.

Unknown speaker 08:14 
And to that by growing two hats, but the next generation of Planaria also did that and

Unknown speaker 08:19 
they're just to me doesn't seem to be a very good explanation for that.

Unknown speaker 08:24 
If we are in sort of this this um old paradigm of evolution, life and biochemistry.

Unknown speaker 08:31 
So my sort of main question to you as as an opening question is, what sort of new paradigm are you working on or what do you think will be the next paradigm to make sense of what you and your colleagues at your lab are doing?I think I think it's important to to say that uh any phenomenon including the two head thing.

Unknown speaker 08:45 
anything else.

Unknown speaker 08:46 
if after it's done, after somebody shows how to do it, you can always tell a standard uh molecular story.Uh that is after the fact,

Unknown speaker 08:51 
you can always zoom down to the molecular events and say that, oh, well, there's nothing special here.

Unknown speaker 08:55 
It's just molecules doing what they do, it's normal laws of chemistry, of course, everything, everything works.

Unknown speaker 09:00 
And so we have to think about the difference between uh telling causal stories backwards,

Unknown speaker 09:03 
trying to explain what happened versus the kinds of paradigms that suggest new experiments and take science forward.

Unknown speaker 09:05 
So this this this gets into this issue of of uh for example, uh reductionism and determinism and things like that.

Unknown speaker 09:10 
Uh a very simple example is um if if there's a chess game that was played.

Unknown speaker 09:14 
And you can look backwards and a reductionist can say, look, I tracked all the electrons and all the protons and everything worked exactly to the laws of physics, it was completely determined, there's there's nothing surprising here.

Unknown speaker 09:26 
And that's true, but how much is that story going to help you play the next chess game, right?

Unknown speaker 09:31 
Not not at all.

Unknown speaker 09:35 
These are, you know, but looking backwards, you can always tell a conventional story and sometimes, especially with our work, you would have to put in some epicycles, so to speak, you would have to, you know, put in some extra bells and whistles to make it fit the conventional paradigm.

Unknown speaker 10:00 
But but you always can.

Unknown speaker 10:01 
And so if, you know, when when somebody says, look, uh, you know, this is this is this is what they've shown, somebody else says, oh, I'm sure there's a molecular explanation for it.

Unknown speaker 10:15 
Of course, there's a molecular explanation for it.

Unknown speaker 10:21 
There's always a a a reductive explanation for it afterwards.

Unknown speaker 10:30 
The real question is what was the paradigm that got you to do the experiment in the first place and why wasn't it done before.

Unknown speaker 10:37 
And so, you know, the first two headed worms.

Unknown speaker 10:40 
I mean, there are many ways to make two headed worms and the first two headed worms were seen at the turn of the last century, so 1903 or so.

Unknown speaker 10:54 
The question though is since between then and uh 2009 when we did it, why did nobody recut them?

Unknown speaker 11:02 
As to my knowledge, nobody ever recut them.

Unknown speaker 11:11 
And the reason you wouldn't recut them is because if you have a standard uh belief that your genome is what determines your morphology and the genome hadn't been touched, well then why would you do it?

Unknown speaker 11:27 
Of course, it's you have an expectation.

Unknown speaker 11:31 
Of course, they will go back to being one headed once you cut off the ectopic head.

Unknown speaker 11:33 
And our our paradigm predicted the opposite because we were thinking of the uh the bioelectric circuits that that store this information as a kind of memory.

Unknown speaker 11:41 
And the most obvious thing about memory is that it keeps state either for either temporarily or or permanently, but it keeps it keeps state.

Unknown speaker 11:49 
So,

Unknown speaker 11:50 
so so I think that's so I think that's important, right?

Unknown speaker 11:51 
It's it's not just the phenotype.

Unknown speaker 11:54 
I mean, anybody can get a double head.

Unknown speaker 11:55 
There's many ways to get a double head.

Unknown speaker 11:56 
Um,

Unknown speaker 11:57 
the the the new so just to answer your your your specific question.

Unknown speaker 11:58 
The new the new I I think what we have here as a new paradigm is this idea that uh everything exists on a spectrum of cognition.

Unknown speaker 12:00 
And that uh you cannot say where something is on that spectrum from philosophical commitments.

Unknown speaker 12:02 
You have to do experiments.

Unknown speaker 12:06 
So, so when we ask what is the correct way to uh communicate or to understand uh cells, to communicate with or to understand cells,

Unknown speaker 12:10 
you don't know that that the standard machine paradigm, meaning with the paradigm for simple machines, you know, this this kind of bottom up emergence, complexity, dynamical systems theory, you don't know that those are your best tools until you try.

Unknown speaker 12:27 
It could well be and I think it is the case that that a lot of these systems uh uh subcellular molecular networks, cells, tissues, organs, are actually uh much further along the spectrum and that means that what you're really doing if you want to uh predict and control and build new things is you have to uh use tools from behavior, it's from the from the behavioral sciences.And so,

Unknown speaker 12:30 
now,

Unknown speaker 12:30 
now this is this is an interesting thing.

Unknown speaker 13:00 
and

Unknown speaker 13:01 
if this is this is this in in drawing this spectrum and and and and being really really open to what kind of systems might be anywhere on the spectrum.

Unknown speaker 13:09 
This this goes against two the two both of the two dominant paradigms.

Unknown speaker 13:13 
because you've got the kind of the molecular biology paradigm which says, look, it's crazy to a to to um

Unknown speaker 13:19 
kind of uh uh to to to it's a category mistake to think that these kind of uh behavioral slash mental um kind of primitives, you know, goals and and memories and things like that.

Unknown speaker 13:30 
It's it's crazy to attribute those to to to these simple systems and that what you need to do is everything needs to be cashed out in the in the laws of chemistry because these are simple machines, okay.

Unknown speaker 13:40 
Then then then of course there's the

Unknown speaker 13:41 
there's the organicist uh position which has been fighting this this view for, you know, for for probably centuries, which says that no look living systems are special.

Unknown speaker 13:50 
They cannot be treated as these systems simple machines.

Unknown speaker 13:53 
They are essentially different.
There's something categorically different about living systems and maybe maybe living systems are cognitive systems, but but the point is these are these are not machines, okay?

Unknown speaker 14:04 
This is this is And so and so the perspective that I bring is is uh goes counter both of those because I'm saying, no, actually, there is no categorical difference.

Unknown speaker 14:13 
What there is is a spectrum of scaling and that even the simplest things have certain properties that might be usefully exploited by a cognitive approach and that all what we need are not stories of categorical differences and and uh, you know, an emergence, what we need are stories of scaling.

Unknown speaker 14:23 
We need to understand how the very

Unknown speaker 14:24 
simple competencies of even, you know, even simple molecular networks are capable of learning and things like that.

Unknown speaker 14:29 
And

Unknown speaker 14:30 
and so what we what we really need to understand is how cognition scales up.

Unknown speaker 14:31 
And so that's that's the idea.

Unknown speaker 14:33 
The idea that we need to be free of these old categories, right?
That that's another thing, you know, when people say it's a category mistake.

Unknown speaker 14:39 
Well, categories aren't

Unknown speaker 14:40 
you know, fixed by philosophy and then we hold on to them.
I mean, it used to be a categorical mistake to uh a category error to think that um the same laws could apply to the motion of physical objects here on earth and motions up in the heavens, right?

Unknown speaker 14:46 
Those that that was

Unknown speaker 14:47 
at one point that was considered a terrible category error.

Unknown speaker 14:48 
So categories need to categories need to to to shift.

Unknown speaker 14:50 
The the science needs to tell us what the categories are, not the other way around.

Unknown speaker 14:51 
And I think that yeah, both of these stories are now crumbling.

Unknown speaker 14:52 
the you know, the these these categorical stories are crumbling.and even point to sort of the mind body story sort of that that got me as as also sort of not very useful, right?

Unknown speaker 15:00 
Um,

Unknown speaker 15:01 
and

Unknown speaker 15:02 
a question I have, Michael, but this is again, speaking in that categories and and any sort of categories, but just to to help viewers understand,

Unknown speaker 15:09 
we usually have sort of this hardware, software, sort of you want things in our era of computing system metaphors we we like to use, right?

Unknown speaker 15:16 
And then sort of your your DNA would be the somehow the software and other proteins within the cell would be the hardware, right?

Unknown speaker 15:23 
And you also sort of crumble that whole distinction, right?

Unknown speaker 15:24 
And you is it right that and I was thinking, would a way one way of looking at it be that that we have this analog uh way of of thinking in the sense that the

Unknown speaker 15:39 
I mean, in the old days, the analog computers, the hard sort of the the algorithm was in the hardware, the configuration of the hardware, right?

Unknown speaker 15:46 
So in this compared to the cell, um, it's sort of the the the

Unknown speaker 15:50 
how the proteins are configured is is a hardware story and and you sort of have discovered, no, there is software, but it's not sort of on that hardware level.

Unknown speaker 15:55 
So it's a different paradigm of computing within the cell, is that a way of looking at it?

Unknown speaker 16:06 
Is that a useful way of thinking?

Unknown speaker 16:07 
Yeah, I mean, I I I think the first thing to to nail down is the this idea that uh all of these things that we talk about, hardware, software, uh instructions, representations, Turing machines, all of this stuff.

Unknown speaker 16:20 
These are not claims about the real system, you know, people always say, well, but some people say that the way, you know, living things are not computers, they're not machines.

Unknown speaker 16:31 
right, because nothing is anything.

Unknown speaker 16:32 
All of these things are frames that we take, you know, when when when when you adopt a computationalist perspective or some other perspective, you're not really saying that's what this thing really is, okay?

Unknown speaker 16:43 
Now, nothing really is anything, what you're saying is, this is the frame that I'm going to take in interacting with that system, let's see how far it gets us.

Unknown speaker 16:53 
So, so that that's all we're really arguing about.

Unknown speaker 16:57 
And and uh the great thing about that is that multiple observers can have and so this is um something that Josh Bongard and I developed, which is which is uh a perspective called poly computing, which is this idea that the same physical event can be seen as as wildly different computations by different observers who interpret the same these the same exact physical event in different ways.

Unknown speaker 17:13 
And so, uh multiple observers can be looking at something and say, oh, I I I see this is this is clearly a Turing machine and somebody else says, well, actually, I see it differently and because of that, I'm able to do something else that you're not able to do.

Unknown speaker 17:29 
This is this is fundamentally important also in medicine, you know, you you you

Unknown speaker 17:30 
you want your orthopedic surgeon to think that you're a mechanical machine, right?

Unknown speaker 17:33 
If you have an orthopedic surgeon that doesn't think that your body is a mechanical machine, you're these not going to get very far.

Unknown speaker 17:39 
But you don't want your psychotherapist to think that you're a mechanical machine.

Unknown speaker 17:42 
And so depending on what you're trying to do, different frames uh are useful.

Unknown speaker 17:47 
So the molecular biologist absolutely have useful um have gotten useful mileage out of this idea that the DNA is the software.

Unknown speaker 17:59 
Yes, you can do certain things that way, but that's certainly not the only perspective.

Unknown speaker 18:04 
And there's there's another very useful perspective in which what the DNA does is simply define the hardware of the cell.

Unknown speaker 18:15 
So the DNA tells you which proteins, which ion channels, which promoters, you're going to have, which determines the those determine the connection between the biochemical reactions that happen in the cell and so on.

Unknown speaker 18:16 
Um that's that that that part's the the hardware and now you can ask, okay, so what is the physiological software that runs on it?

Unknown speaker 18:32 
What is the uh what's the plasticity of it?

Unknown speaker 18:33 
How do you communicate with it?

Unknown speaker 18:37 
What what is it paying attention to?

Unknown speaker 18:39 
You know, what are the cognitive competencies of this uh of the software.

Unknown speaker 18:42 
And I also want to be really clear that by saying hardware and software, I absolutely don't mean that living things are well captured by the current architectures that we have, you know, this is I'm I I I do not hold to a computationalist perspective where I think everything is a computation and that's all and that's all that there is.

Unknown speaker 18:55 
It's the I do think it's a useful perspective in some cases, but it certainly doesn't capture everything that that that we need to do.

Unknown speaker 18:55 
And also, I think that people are um often too hyper focused on the kind of the modern um, you know, whatever the the the current embodiments of these things.

Unknown speaker 19:00 
So people are thinking about, you know, current language models and and they say AI can or can't do this and and what they have in mind are these language models.

Unknown speaker 19:12 
Well, that's just I mean, that's that's a tiny sliver of of the space of possibilities in computer science.

Unknown speaker 19:17 
And the same thing with with with the idea of software and these architectures, you know, of course, of course, living things are not a von Neumann computer.

Unknown speaker 19:33 
Uh, but there are interesting aspects of um of the software paradigm that are really I think useful in in biology.

Unknown speaker 19:39 
For example, uh, people who who program have a have a have an interesting um uh dualism that they buy into, which means that they they have this paradigm that your algorithm, your algorithm determines what the computer does.

Unknown speaker 19:48 
It makes the electrons dance.

Unknown speaker 19:59 
Now, you can imagine um and I I wrote this this this um you know, this little little just for a joke, I wrote this little dialogue on my blog where this this uh candidate comes to a software company uh for a job, you know.

Unknown speaker 20:00 
interviewing for a job and and the guy says uh so uh

Unknown speaker 20:01 
you know, you want to you're going to code up some cool stuff for us and he says, look,

Unknown speaker 20:05 
uh, the computer is a physical device, it obeys the laws of of of physics.

Unknown speaker 20:10 
What what what what's this what's this magical algorithm that you think is going to is going to push around the atoms.

Unknown speaker 20:14 
No, they do what they do.

Unknown speaker 20:15 
Uh, you know,

Unknown speaker 20:16 
and and so right.

Unknown speaker 20:17 
So so so it's not that that's wrong, but if you have that perspective, are you going to code anything useful?

Unknown speaker 20:23 
You're not, right?

Unknown speaker 20:23 
And so and so you need to really believe that these these these higher levels have a have a causal functionality to them.

Unknown speaker 20:28 
Otherwise, nothing happens and I think, you know, they very naturally, people very naturally

Unknown speaker 20:30 
do believe that software actually does in some in some important way make the electrons dance, right?

Unknown speaker 20:38 
So, that is really critical also in the kinds of things that that that we work on, you know, this idea that you can't just be stuck at the lowest level.

Unknown speaker 20:46 
Hmm.

Unknown speaker 20:47 
And just to this is all just very fascinating stuff, but to reflect on sort of the mind body and also on this this hardware software, though it is sort of a limiting metaphor.

Unknown speaker 21:00 
I know that, but um,

Unknown speaker 21:02 
how important you think is sort of our these bioelectric fields within for instance, our own body, and to what degree sort of is my makeup done by just genes and sort of totally explainable from sort of molecular wave looking at it, and to what degree do we have to sort of invoke the stuff you are working on.

Unknown speaker 21:21 
Is there sort of something you can say about that for people who are new to this?

Unknown speaker 21:24 
Sure.

Unknown speaker 21:25 
Yeah, um, again, keep in mind that the idea isn't just to explain.

Unknown speaker 21:28 
Looking backwards, you can always explain things at the lowest level.

Unknown speaker 21:32 
In fact, when when I've you know, sometimes when I discuss this with people and I say, look, reductionism, you know, you like you want to reduce it to the lower level, and then and then you could say, ah, so you want to be talking about quantum foam, right?

Unknown speaker 21:43 
I mean, reduce everything to quantum foam and say, no, no, no, that's crazy, you know, chemistry, not not.

Unknown speaker 21:48 
Okay, so so that tells you right there, you're not really trying to reduce.

Unknown speaker 21:54 
You've picked the level and and and you sort of stay stay with it, right?

Unknown speaker 22:00 
So, so to me, the idea isn't to explain, because you can often explain things at this level after the fact.

Unknown speaker 22:01 
The idea is looking forward.

Unknown speaker 22:04 
So the idea is, okay, what insight have we gained to enable us to do the next great thing, which means new experiments, new research program, new new biomedical treatments, new synthetic bioengineering to improve, you know, everybody's life.

Unknown speaker 22:13 
Um, which which of these paradigms helps you make the next great discovery, right?

Unknown speaker 22:18 
And it's and so, so I think that uh, what's what's really important here is that if you if you do have this paradigm that um, it's it's the genetics that determine everything.

Unknown speaker 22:28 
And and I mean, there are many people beside

Unknown speaker 22:59 
It's me.

Unknown speaker 23:00 
I'm not the it's certainly not the only person to be saying that that, you know, the genetics is not a hard deterministic kind of thing.

Unknown speaker 23:08 
I mean many people saying that.But what's what I think is interesting and different about our work is that if you

Unknown speaker 22:30 
if if if you think about evolution as not producing solutions to specific problems, which is the typical way of thinking about um, you know, genetic search is that is that you're going to find the genome that produces something that it has the highest fitness in the environment and that's it, you're looking for a solution to a specific fitness function.

Unknown speaker 22:30 
What I what I think evolution is actually doing is is uh developing um problem solving agents.

Unknown speaker 23:14 
I don't just mean clever animals that do things in three-dimensional space, I mean molecular networks that can learn cells and tissues that solve problems in physiological space and anatomical space and so on.

Unknown speaker 23:23 
And so, if if you if you have this idea that uh that that what what comes out of of evolution are these uh problem solving agents with competencies with certain degrees of intelligence that is up to us to discover.

Unknown speaker 23:36 
That opens up a whole new frontier of research programs aroundhow do we detect unconventional intelligence in operating in different problem spaces, how do we communicate with it in ways that are effective to change their behavior, right?

Unknown speaker 24:08 
purposes and so on.

Unknown speaker 24:11 
And uh,

Unknown speaker 24:12 
of course, of course, we'll also have ethical

Unknown speaker 24:13 
implications in terms of being making us much more

Unknown speaker 24:14 
open-minded about uh, what what kinds of things deserve care

Unknown speaker 24:15 
and compassion and so on.

Unknown speaker 24:21 
Um, and uh,

Unknown speaker 24:22 
that that's that's the idea that that that through the, you know,

Unknown speaker 24:25 
bioelectricity.

Unknown speaker 24:27 
Bioelectricity isn't magic, right?

Unknown speaker 24:28 
There there's probably my my guess is that throughout the universe there's

Unknown speaker 24:29 
lots of different physical modalities that can serve as this kind of cognitive glue that I think what's important about bioelectricity here on earth.

Unknown speaker 24:34 
But but here what I think evolution has done from theThat's how you call it Michael cognitive glue?

Unknown speaker 24:09 
sort of cognitive glue is how you bio electric

Unknown speaker 24:09 
bio electricity is sort of cognitive glue.

Unknown speaker 24:09 
It's a kind of cognitive glue and what I mean by that is that I think it would be a real mistake to see the bioelectricity as just another piece of uh chemistry and physics that you need to add to what we already know about, you know, a methylation and uh, you know, all these other chemical gradients and all this stuff.

Unknown speaker 24:25 
Okay, fine, so here are some voltage gradients.

Unknown speaker 24:26 
I think I you you could do that and some people do that, but but I think that's a big mistake because because what's actually important about bioelectricity

Unknown speaker 24:34 
is that it functions as a cognitive glue and what I mean by that is, you know, think of think of how it works in the brain.

Unknown speaker 24:40 
Uh, we are a giant collection of uh, an enormous collection of

Unknown speaker 25:00 
individual neurons.

Unknown speaker 25:01 
And yet, those neurons

Unknown speaker 25:02 
uh come together in some way to give rise to a new individual

Unknown speaker 25:06 
that has goals, preferences, memories, uh and capacities that none of the individual neurons have.

Unknown speaker 25:12 
So we exist because the neuron we we as as human minds exist

Unknown speaker 25:16 
because the individual neurons and other cells in our brain are tied together

Unknown speaker 25:21 
via some uh uh interaction policies and some mechanisms that underlie those policies

Unknown speaker 25:26 
that enable them to function as a large as a whole, as a collective that is more than the sum of its parts.

Unknown speaker 25:32 
That's the cognitive glue.

Unknown speaker 25:33 
Now, in the brain, it's not controversial, we know what it is, in the brain, the cognitive glue is the electrophysiology that runs the electrical networks in our brain.

Unknown speaker 25:39 
So, so my point is that evolution did not uh wait until brains evolved to make use of this, this is extremely ancient.

Unknown speaker 25:46 
and even even bacterial biofilms, you know, the very first uh kind of attempts at multicellularity,

Unknown speaker 25:50 
a kind of weak form of multicellularity, were already using electrical networks and there's there's very nice data on this from um

Unknown speaker 25:55 
uh Groswell and other other people showing that uh even even individual bacteria living in a network form a kind of collective that does better than the individuals do because it uses bioelectricity to integrate information across space and time.

Unknown speaker 26:03 
So they use information across they they use bioelectricity to share

Unknown speaker 26:04 
a nutrient information across the across the the colony and they use it to organize feeding cycles as a as a kind of biorhythm inside the

Unknown speaker 26:27 
That's amazing.

Unknown speaker 26:28 
That's amazing.

Unknown speaker 26:29 
So we knew.

Unknown speaker 26:30 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 26:31 
We knew already of course about molecular signaling, but that's sort of the the the the art way way of secreting molecules that sort of inform the the the sort of a colony of of bacteria, right?

Unknown speaker 26:39 
But this is these fields

Unknown speaker 26:40 
I'm just so uh and this is really a lay lay question, but in what is needed, what's the substrate needed for these fields sort of ions, so what is needed sort of create to create these fields?

Unknown speaker 26:53 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 26:54 
Yeah, so again, I'll point out that that the cognitive glue function could in theory be be um implemented by many other mechanisms, you know, maybe out there in the wide universe, there are other ways to do it, I'm probably there is, but but but but what I like about bioelectricity is that it shows us one example, one clear example of how it happens.

Unknown speaker 27:14 
and I'll and I'll I'll I'll tell you what uh how how I see this happening.

Unknown speaker 27:15 
So, so a single uh let let's just talk about single cells.

Unknown speaker 27:24 
Um a single cell and and by the way, I don't believe that single cells are the origin of of cognition.

Unknown speaker 27:25 
I think it goes well below that, but let's just you know.

Unknown speaker 27:27 
Serious, okay, let's go into that as well.

Unknown speaker 27:28 
Yeah, yeah, we can yeah, we can we can get into that.

Unknown speaker 27:29 
Yeah, no, I I think by

Unknown speaker 27:59 
it's I think cells are already, you know, kind of high on that on that spectrum.

Unknown speaker 28:03 
So, so, so here's how it works.

Unknown speaker 28:07 
If you have a single cell.

Unknown speaker 28:14 
sell something very interesting, which is a kind of memory or historicity.

Unknown speaker 28:17 
Because if something happens and there's a particular voltage state,

Unknown speaker 28:19 
that changes the channel, which then changes the voltage state, which changes the right?

Unknown speaker 28:24 
And so and so you have this feedback loop that can hold memories and it can make decisions and so on.

Unknown speaker 28:28 
It's already even right there alone.

Unknown speaker 28:30 
With that with that just with that one ion channel protein,

Unknown speaker 28:33 
you have some very interesting uh um uh you know, atoms, so to speak, of of cognition all already right there.

Unknown speaker 28:40 
But when you put cells into networks, what happens is that the electrical properties of one cell can influence the electrical properties of another cell just like in the brain, and and and the whole thing propagates, uh, you know, you have information flow throughout.

Unknown speaker 29:13 
throughout

Unknown speaker 29:13 
the network.

Unknown speaker 29:14 
Now,

Unknown speaker 29:14 
the cognitive glue portion

Unknown speaker 29:15 
comes in in the following way.

Unknown speaker 29:15 
Uh,

Unknown speaker 29:16 
one way that cells can connect,

Unknown speaker 29:17 
uh, can pass information is to send each other chemical signals.

Unknown speaker 29:18 
Now, if I secrete, so you and I are cells, I secrete a chemical signal, it goes, floats over to you, you receive it with a receptor.

Unknown speaker 29:21 
It's very easy for you to recognize that it came from outside.

Unknown speaker 29:22 
And so you know it's a signal that came from outside and you can uh ignore it, you can pay attention to it, you can interpret it in various ways, you can believe it, not believe it, whatever.

Unknown speaker 29:26 
But uh evolution found something very cool, which is called a gap junction.

Unknown speaker 29:27 
And a gap junction is a set of proteins on either side of two adjacent cells that have they make a little like a little conduit.

Unknown speaker 29:28 
You can imagine two two submarines docking together via a little hatch.

Unknown speaker 29:30 
And so what happens when the gap junctions um open between cells is that small molecules freely pass from one to the other.

Unknown speaker 29:32 
Okay?

Unknown speaker 29:32 
Now this this makes for a very uh very interesting thing because let's say you let let's say you have two cells, uh one cell gets poked,

Unknown speaker 29:34 
there's a there's a there's a damage event.

Unknown speaker 29:35 
One cell gets poked with something, there's a calcium spike, you know, that that serves as a uh a memory of the damage.

Unknown speaker 29:38 
That calcium spike now propagates to the next cell.

Unknown speaker 29:41 
Now, if the next cell can't tell that that memory of damage,

Unknown speaker 30:00 
image.

Unknown speaker 30:01 
belongs to somebody else.

Unknown speaker 30:02 
because a calcium spikes, a calcium spike, it it does not have metadata on it that say who does who who's memory this is.

Unknown speaker 30:08 
So if you have a bunch of cells that are connected with gap junctions, what you find is that they have a really hard time separating which memories are yours and which memories are mine.

Unknown speaker 30:15 
It means that we are now in a mind meld that makes it really difficult, not impossible, but really difficult for us to have our own independent thoughts.

Unknown speaker 30:23 
Because because we are now sharing them, it's literally literally this kind of crazy mind meld.

Unknown speaker 30:28 
So, so, so, so the way the cognitive glue works, a few a few things happen.

Unknown speaker 30:31 
First of all, it's a it's a it's a mind meld with respect to a lot of different memories, that's the first thing.

Unknown speaker 30:36 
So now it's not me and you, now it's just we as far as memories that define a cognitive agent.

Unknown speaker 30:45 
So you can already see how the scale up, you know, the scaling is starting to happen.

Unknown speaker 30:57 
The second thing is that because lots of cells are joining together, they their um physical area of concern becomes bigger so that now things that happen over here matter to me over here, right?

Unknown speaker 31:03 
And and because signals take time to pass through the gap junctions, now even the temporal aspect is thicker because now now now now now there's a, you know, it takes there's a now moment which you for for the collective, which is which has a minimum width to it, right?

Unknown speaker 31:13 
which is certainly the case in neural systems as well.

Unknown speaker 31:17 
Also, there's the notion of stress propagation.

Unknown speaker 31:23 
So, if uh if you if we think about stress as just the distance from the target of some homeostatic.

Unknown speaker 31:33 
Uh minutes, minutes.

Unknown speaker 31:36 
Oh minutes.

Unknown speaker 31:37 
Okay, can take a while, all right.

Unknown speaker 31:38 
minutes.

Unknown speaker 31:51 
because well, I mean, so, so, so one thing you can do is you can take any neuroscience paper and just do a simple find replace.

Unknown speaker 31:53 
You take anytime it says neuron, you just say cell, and anytime it says millisecond, you say minutes, and then you got yourself a nice developmental biology paper.

Unknown speaker 31:59 
Because what evolution did is just turn the same it just pivoted the exact same mechanisms from from navigating uh anatomical space to navigating three-dimensional space.

Unknown speaker 32:02 
And then it had to crank up time because because now you have to you have muscles and nerves, you have to run around and not get eaten.

Unknown speaker 32:07 
So, so, you know, developmental processes are slow, you have you have weeks and or or months to form a certain embryo or to regenerate or whatever, you you have time.

Unknown speaker 32:18 
So all of that all of that stuff is slower.

Unknown speaker 32:20 
Uh, so, so, so what's happening here is that uh you have the you have your cell, the cell sheet connected by gap junctions.

Unknown speaker 32:23 
Now, now imagine if all of this all of the um all of the cells are trying to maintain some kind of homeostatic state.

Unknown speaker 32:27 
Let's say pH or hunger level or something, right?

Unknown speaker 32:38 
There's a there's a target set point and they're trying to maintain it in a cycle.

Unknown speaker 32:43 
Well, stress is basically the the measure of error, how far away from your goal you are, right?

Unknown speaker 32:50 
If all you do is keep your own stress, then everybody has their own little battle going on and everybody's doing their best, but they're all it's just a collection of parts.

Unknown speaker 32:57 
But now imagine that you're starting to leak stress.

Unknown speaker 33:01 
You're starting to leak stress through gap junctions, through other mechanisms externally, whatever.

Unknown speaker 33:03 
If I'm sitting next to you and you are super stressed out and you're leaking your stress, now I'm a little bit stressed.

Unknown speaker 33:11 
And what happens is that in order for me to reduce my stress, one of the things I might want to do is help you, not because I'm altruistic, but because you're stressing me out.

Unknown speaker 33:17 
And and if I reduce yours, so, so what's happening here is by this kind of stress sharing means that your problems become my problems.

Unknown speaker 33:23 
And things that are happening over there, they're making a, you know, some sort of a mess over here are now suddenly my concern.

Unknown speaker 33:28 
So, so, so what what these kind of mechanisms do is they enlarge the cognitive like, the cognitive like is the the the the size of the space and time um bubble that you care about.

Unknown speaker 33:33 
What are you what are you actually actively working to to fix?

Unknown speaker 33:41 
And as it grows, your your area of concern become bigger than a single cell, it's now the whole thing.

Unknown speaker 33:50 
Now, now you've got now you've got a larger collective that can operate in anatomical space.

Unknown speaker 33:57 
And so this is how intelligence levels up.

Unknown speaker 34:06 
No, no individual cell knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have, but the collective absolutely does.

Unknown speaker 34:17 
And that's how you get to things like a salamander limb where you you cut, you know, you can amputate anywhere along the length, and the cells will build exactly the right thing.

Unknown speaker 34:20 
And then the most amazing part is they stop when they're done because that error, that delta to the final pattern has been reduced to acceptable levels.

Unknown speaker 34:23 
But that the pattern that they're the

Unknown speaker 35:00 
set point that they're trying to re-

Unknown speaker 35:01 
create with something that no individual cell could do.

Unknown speaker 35:04 
And it's not in the in the genome, none of that stuff is in the genome.

Unknown speaker 35:09 
What's in the genome is proteins.

Unknown speaker 35:09 
where is it?

Unknown speaker 35:10 
Because one way to look at when you say that that's the amazing part when it knows where to stop, right?

Unknown speaker 35:16 
When my cells know the body is sort of complete.

Unknown speaker 35:17 
And you also talk about, you even sometimes in your writing use the word story, right?

Unknown speaker 35:28 
There's a story that sort of collective story of of of what the the um correct outcome look like, looks like.

Unknown speaker 35:30 
Where is that story stored or written?

Unknown speaker 35:32 
because it seems to be accessed a new when sort of we have in in in a new organism.

Unknown speaker 35:41 
I mean, this was this is what truly puzzles me.

Unknown speaker 35:41 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 35:42 
Uh, okay, well, the first thing I'll say is that if if if we really knew the answers to all those questions, we would be, you know, the world would be unrecognizable.

Unknown speaker 35:54 
So I'm not I'm not going to I'm not going to claim to give you the final answer, but but I can tell you what we know now.

Unknown speaker 36:00 
Uh, there are two questions here that you're really asking, where is it, where and how is it stored?

Unknown speaker 36:05 
And where does it come from and what happens in new organisms?

Unknown speaker 36:08 
Okay, those are two those are two very related but quite different questions.

Unknown speaker 36:10 
On the first one, we we kind of actually know, we can we've developed tools uh to to to see it.

Unknown speaker 36:14 
So we can read and write and and and to some extent people have, you know, in in the biochemical in the biochemical world, people have talked about chemical pre-patterns and and morphogen gradients.

Unknown speaker 36:25 
I mean, that that's that those are all conventional stories.

Unknown speaker 36:30 
We we've added to this this idea that we can actually see these bioelectrical patterns.

Unknown speaker 36:32 
So so we should we have um tools much like neuroscientists do in the brain to read memories out of the brain, right?

Unknown speaker 36:35 
So people are are working on that.

Unknown speaker 36:38 
So so we have now tools where you can literally see, for example, the electric face, this this this pre-pattern that tells you where should the eye go, how many should there be, where should the mouth be, how many heads should a planarian have.

Unknown speaker 36:50 
These are these are states of distributed bioelectrical circuits that are now visible.

Unknown speaker 36:55 
You could you can you can see them.

Unknown speaker 37:00 
And better than being able to see them, you can change them.

Unknown speaker 37:01 
That's that's that's what really that's what makes it um clear that they really exist.

Unknown speaker 37:03 
Because in another way of saying it would be to just to go back to your your original question.

Unknown speaker 37:05 
Another way of saying it would be for for for forget all this all this kind of cognitive talk.

Unknown speaker 37:08 
All there is is molecular reactions.

Unknown speaker 37:10 
So if you want uh an extra eye or a worm with two heads, just manage the electrical reactions, that's all you get the the molecular reactions, that's all you get.

Unknown speaker 37:21 
That that's the conventional view and the implications of that conventional view is that you really need to micromanage all of those chemical reactions to get what you want.

Unknown speaker 37:29 
Now, that's incredi

Unknown speaker 38:00 
ably difficult because because the mapping backwards, if I know what I want, well what should the what should every gene be doing, what should every cell be doing, what should every molecule be doing, that's really hard.

Unknown speaker 38:09 
But but my claim is the reason the reason that I think uh my my claim about goal directedness and intelligence in these tissues is true,

Unknown speaker 38:16 
is not just because we see these patterns, because you can also explain them at the molecular level.

Unknown speaker 38:21 
The reason is is that by targeting those those patterns and interventions by using the techniques of of of changing memories, you get to make complex outcomes that nobody could make before because the micro management is to is too hard, right?

Unknown speaker 38:35 
So so so think about you know, the the a simple neuroscience example of this is you you have a rat and you want the rat to do a circus trick, you know, sit on a little bicycle or something.And somebody says, okay, I can see this thing is a is a is a deterministic uh molecular system.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
but someone who understands what they're at really is.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
can say, no, no, no, you don't need to do any of that, you train the rat.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
What do you mean you train the rat?

Unknown speaker 38:45 
Top down control, you you collaborate with the rat, you incentivize the rat by um and and and what's magic about that is that it then pushes uh that that that view of it, that top down control pushes all the complexity onto the system itself.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
You don't need to figure out which neurons need to fire, the rats already very good at knowing what what needs to be done, given certain top level controls.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
It's a communication problem.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
It's not a micro management problem.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
So, so, so the same thing, the same thing is going on here.

Unknown speaker 38:45 
these um these patterns.

Unknown speaker 39:44 
We we know we know this is a this is a gold directed phenomenon.

Unknown speaker 39:47 
Because we change the goals, we don't touch the hardware, we don't we don't change the DNA, we don't tell any of the stem cells what to do, all of that is taken care of by the system.

Unknown speaker 39:55 
All we do is reset the goals.That's the beauty of gold driven systems is that you can communicate with them, you can reset the goals, maybe they learn some some cells and.

Unknown speaker 39:22 
So,

Unknown speaker 39:22 
so, so we know where the information is stored, okay?

Unknown speaker 39:22 
At least partially it's stored, it's it's represented by a distribution of voltage gradients across the tissue and those gradients serve as the reference point for what to build and when to stop.

Unknown speaker 39:22 
Now Michael Robust ist die.

Unknown speaker 40:00 
these uh

Unknown speaker 40:01 
are these states

Unknown speaker 40:02 
and how much of the organism has to stay intact for this information to sort of just uh

Unknown speaker 40:06 
be accessible again.

Unknown speaker 40:08 
Yeah, this is

Unknown speaker 40:10 
it seems that

Unknown speaker 40:11 
it seems that sort of just cutting off one head sort of didn't sort of the information was still there to grow in the to know again it should go to two heads, right?

Unknown speaker 40:20 
Yeah,

Unknown speaker 40:20 
oh, a planarian can be cut into 275 pieces.

Unknown speaker 40:23 
So, so in in planaria, it is incredibly um holographic.

Unknown speaker 40:34 
It's it's the circuit rescales.

Unknown speaker 40:34 
And so, um, you know, in other organisms, it's not quite that robust, but still, you know, even even even mammalian embryos including humans in the early stages, you can cut them into pieces and you get monozygotic twins and triplets and quadruplets, you know, you don't get half bodies at least at early stages.

Unknown speaker 40:50 
So, so there is a lot of rescaling of this kind of thing going on.

Unknown speaker 40:54 
Um, the second question you asked though, is is much harder and much deeper, which is where do they come from in the first place.

Unknown speaker 41:07 
And so,

Unknown speaker 41:07 
so let's just let's just look at that for a second.

Unknown speaker 41:07 
Where do they come from and what happens in new in in new ones.

Unknown speaker 41:08 
Um,

Unknown speaker 41:09 
overall, the question of where things come from is uh, is is it needs to be treated differently than than a lot of the other questions we deal with.

Unknown speaker 41:17 
Because uh, and and mathematicians uh have been on top of this for for a long time, starting with Plato and Pythagoras and probably long before that, which is that there are many things in the world that are kind of free lunches in the in the physics sense that uh evolution takes advantage of.

Unknown speaker 41:35 
For example, just as as a stupid example.

Unknown speaker 41:37 
Let's say um, let's say in a certain world, it's very simple, there's an evolution going on and the most fit thing in this world is a certain kind of triangle, certain shape of triangle.

Unknown speaker 41:46 
So, you know, evolution goes and and lots of uh does lots of generations and it gets the first angle.

Unknown speaker 41:51 
And then lots more generations go by and it gets the second angle.

Unknown speaker 42:00 
Now here's now now here's the magic part.

Unknown speaker 42:01 
You don't need to do anymore.

Unknown speaker 42:01 
You know what the third angle is, yeah, you get it for free.

Unknown speaker 42:02 
And it wasn't amazing, isn't it?

Unknown speaker 42:04 
This is not philosophical fluff.

Unknown speaker 42:04 
This is incredibly practical.

Unknown speaker 42:06 
Evolution gets to save 1/3 of its time here because of this incredible free gift from geometry, the fact that once you know two angles in flat space, you know the third.

Unknown speaker 42:12 
So, so now there's tons of this stuff, tons of it.

Unknown speaker 42:14 
you know, when when you make a when you make a voltage sensitive gap junction ion channel rather, you have a transistor.

Unknown speaker 42:21 
When you have a couple of transistors, you have a logic gate, when you have logic gates, you have truth tables and and you can build, you know, whatever functions you want.

Unknown speaker 42:28 
Do you need to evolve the elements of that truth table?

Unknown speaker 42:32 
No, you get it for free.

Unknown speaker 42:33 
Do you need to evolve the fact that the NAND, the not and gate is is universal, it's special?

Unknown speaker 42:38 
No, you get that for free.

Unknown speaker 42:39 
Where does it come from, right?

Unknown speaker 42:40 
Where do these things live, you know, the rules of the laws of computation, the laws of geometry, the the laws of mathematics, where where do they live, right?

Unknown speaker 42:48 
So, so, you know, so, so Plato and Pythagoras had this idea that uh, there is a platonic space of these kinds of things, of these forms.

Unknown speaker 42:50 
And I think we need to take this seriously in that I think one thing that evolution is doing is searching through pointers into that space.

Unknown speaker 43:06 
So I think evolution is not really searching the uh the the horrible complex rugged space of microstates of all the hardware, phenotypic space.

Unknown speaker 43:08 
I think evolution is actually looking for pointers into uh it's it's looking for physical embodiments that that basically uh take advantage of this this incredible uh space of forms that already pre-exist.

Unknown speaker 43:15 
I mean, in a certain sense, it's the physics and the chemistry of the physical world.

Unknown speaker 43:16 
In another sense, these things, you know, the laws of number theory and all this other stuff, they would be exactly the same if the universe was different, right?

Unknown speaker 43:42 
If all the laws of physics were changed at the Big Bang, this I I I think and I mean, I'm certainly not not an expert on the mathematics of it, but but to my understanding, all of those things would still be exactly as true.

Unknown speaker 43:52 
So, so there's something else here that isn't captured by our our typical accounting of what happens in the in the physical, you know, kind of the the physical world.

Unknown speaker 44:00 
And for this reason, and so and so I think that is what evolution is doing.

Unknown speaker 44:09 
It's it's um finding hardware that is exploiting some of these things.

Unknown speaker 44:13 
And therefore, and so now now we come to the to the final step is what happens in novel organisms.

Unknown speaker 44:14 
Specifically, I the reason we make xenobots and anthrobots and and various other things all all these synthetic beings is to explore the latent space around the one point that normal development gives us.

Unknown speaker 44:28 
So normal development gives us here's a here's a frog embryo or here's um uh here's an oak tree leaf and this is what it looks like, here's the shape, here's the and we say, okay, we know, we know what the oak genome does, it makes these nice flat green leaves, fine.

Unknown speaker 44:43 
Well, it turns out that there's a there's a there's a space of of there's a latent space of possibilities which if if uh which we wouldn't know about if we hadn't seen that there's a bioengineer, a non-human bioengineer, which is a wasp, and these wasps will will lay an egg on the

Unknown speaker 45:00 
leaves,

Unknown speaker 45:01 
and the signals from the from the eggs

Unknown speaker 45:03 
will uh

Unknown speaker 45:05 
basically hack this the leaf cells to build this incredible like red spiky yellow looking round thing with this these galls, these amazingly shaped galls.

Unknown speaker 45:15 
We would have no idea that the normal cells, the genetically normal cells of the plant are able to build this, because all we ever see is one point.

Unknown speaker 45:21 
We see the normal default behavior.

Unknown speaker 45:25 
In fact, it's so consistent, it's so robust that we we really think that's that's all it does.

Unknown speaker 45:30 
But with a little bit of with a little bit of prompting, and I use that word advisedly, with a little bit of of prompting, you find out that oh no, actually there there are these other shapes around.

Unknown speaker 45:39 
And so who knows what else is there.

Unknown speaker 45:40 
So so this is this is what I think of these synthetic um when when I call the, you know, people say, why do you call them xenobots?

Unknown speaker 45:44 
They're they're living organisms or they're, you know, they're animal caps or something else.

Unknown speaker 45:50 
The reason I call them uh I call them xenobots is because I view this as a vehicle for exploring the the latent space.

Unknown speaker 45:58 
I want to see what else, what other forms and functions are around in the space around this uh this this this you know, what what the genomic hardware can do.

Unknown speaker 46:08 
And so now, so now this is I think what is what is the just the barest beginnings of the answer to your question, when we make anthropods, you know, these are these are um little little biobots that are made from from uh tracheal cells of of adult human donors, they have all kinds of cool properties.

Unknown speaker 46:16 
They not only do they form interesting shapes and they they swim around on their own, they have they're self-motile, but they have new capabilities, like for example, they um uh they repair neural wounds.

Unknown speaker 46:23 
And uh in in other they they take neural neural uh neural scratches and they and they heal the sides together and they do some other stuff that um that nobody's seen yet, it isn't published yet, but hopefully it will be later this year, we'll have some some cool stories about them.

Unknown speaker 46:30 
And so, so where does all this come from?

Unknown speaker 46:31 
Or in the case of xenobots, kinematic self-replication, the fact that they can make copies of themselves by coalescing material from that they find outside in the environment.

Unknown speaker 46:39 
I I I think that what we're seeing here is uh the ability of biological hardware to explore and take advantage of other uh other regions of this this platonic space of of possibilities, um that um that allow them to solve problems.

Unknown speaker 46:49 
And so that that's that's what I think is is is happening here.

Unknown speaker 46:50 
And when you say where is it encoded, where does it come from?

Unknown speaker 46:51 
We have a couple of uh ingredients to that to the answer.

Unknown speaker 46:52 
You have the genomic hard

Unknown speaker 47:30 
hardware, which is, well, it's

Unknown speaker 47:31 
it's it's this way because that's where it was encoded, so some of it is certainly genomically encoded.

Unknown speaker 47:36 
Some of it is emergent in the standard version of a complexity and emergence, you have you have simple rules like cellular automata, they do stuff and then boom, there's an.

Unknown speaker 47:44 
So some some of them are some of them are are hardware encoded, some of them are emergent.

Unknown speaker 47:49 
Uh, others are really drawing from this uh from the space of wherever the laws of mathematics and computation come from, right?

Unknown speaker 48:03 
And others are generated on the fly by the cognitive processes of the system.

Unknown speaker 48:17 
So those are the ingredients in where do they come from.

Unknown speaker 48:18 
Yeah, amazing.

Unknown speaker 48:18 
And so the um the standard view because that sort of also um the amazing implications for for instance cancer could be that we now have this paradigm of micromanaging that disease, right?

Unknown speaker 48:30 
Just targeting it on our level, whereas if we could do the goal setting on the the the cellular level saying to these cells, okay, the new the goal is again to cooperate, then

Unknown speaker 48:38 
that could be a a future cure of cancer, right?

Unknown speaker 48:44 
which could be an implication of your work.

Unknown speaker 48:45 
Totally.

Unknown speaker 48:45 
And and we've done this.

Unknown speaker 48:45 
In the in the frog model, we've already done this.

Unknown speaker 48:48 
So, so we've we've shown that um you can uh after you can inject uh human oncogenes into a taple and they will make tumors and if you do that, but you force the cells into a proper electrical state with the communicating with their neighbors, you prevent tumorigenesis even though the oncogene is blazingly strongly expressed.

Unknown speaker 49:08 
And that's not because you don't you don't destroy the onco protein, you're not managing the the the, you know, the the micro level details of of transformation.

Unknown speaker 49:17 
No, what you're doing is you're forcing that cell to stay connected to their neighbors.

Unknown speaker 49:20 
And when when you have a mind meld with a large collective that all says we are building a nice kidney, we are building a skin, it's really hard for that cell to have an independent thought of, you know what?

Unknown speaker 49:38 
I I my goal is to proliferate as much as I can and crawl away wherever life is good, right?

Unknown speaker 50:00 
each of our lives, but also evolutionarily.

Unknown speaker 50:01 
We start our life as a as a microbe, uh,

Unknown speaker 50:03 
as a single cell with a tiny little cognitive like, we only care about what happens in the cell.

Unknown speaker 50:06 
Everything else is is environment.

Unknown speaker 50:09 
And with evolution and development, that cognitive like grows and then it could sometimes shrink again.

Unknown speaker 50:13 
And so, so this is, so this is the, you know, one of the very clear examples of how this stuff uh, is not just uh, you know, wishful philosophical thinking and, you know, no, no, it has it has very practical implications that if you follow through, you discover therapeutics.

Unknown speaker 50:32 
Um, I heard you say the word mind melt.

Unknown speaker 50:33 
I like, I like that a lot because it's a good thing for an organism in a sense that our cells have a mind melt which makes that that my body functions well.

Unknown speaker 50:43 
Do you see that possible on higher levels?
I mean, what are your thoughts on sort of a uh, uh, Gaia, uh, like thoughts on a sort of planetary mind or universal minds.
I mean, do you, are you open to ideas like that?

Unknown speaker 50:57 
Uh, yeah, uh, so, so the first, so two, two things I want to say about that.

Unknown speaker 51:00 
One is that it's I I certainly think it's possible.
Um, absolutely, I think it's possible, but I think it's very uh, important that we don't fall into the trap of, I mean, some people say, that's ridiculous, that's a misuse of the terms, and other people say, oh, absolutely, the whole universe is one giant mind, you know, guy, like, okay, both of those are are hypotheses.

Unknown speaker 51:22 
You cannot decide between those just by sitting in your armchair and deciding which one feels good to you.
You need to do experiments.
And obviously, on the higher level, you know, on the level of the universe, the level of the solar system, I can think of how to do those experiments, but they're not practical.

Unknown speaker 51:36 
And on the level of ecosystems, you know, maybe, maybe it's practical to, to, to try some of this stuff.
Can you train an ecosystem?
Maybe, uh, but but again, all of this is these are empirical questions of how to recognize minds and others.

Unknown speaker 51:50 
Yeah, sorry to interrupt you because you say you can't think of experiments though not practical.

Unknown speaker 51:51 
And this is what a lot of physicists do, right?
They they come up with these but do you have, do you have an idea how you could uh, make that testable?

Unknown speaker 51:57 
Sure, sure.
So, so, so that's one of the things that that our framework is trying to do is is to develop um, general roadmaps for discovering novel intelligences.

Unknown speaker 52:04 
And one of the simplest ways, and this is certainly doesn't uh, go all the way, but one of the simplest ways to to know when you've communicated with an intelligence is when you can train it, right?
Because, because simple, even simple minds have certain kinds of

Unknown speaker 53:00 
learning that they can do, habituation, sensitization, associative learning, prediction and and so on.

Unknown speaker 53:05 
So you can imagine like when somebody says to me um, well, you know, your view then then I guess you say even the weather is is is is, you know, has a mind.

Unknown speaker 53:07 
So well, I don't say that it does.

Unknown speaker 53:07 
I say that it might.

Unknown speaker 53:14 
crazy, how how would you train a, you know, of of of, you know, a hurricane or something.

Unknown speaker 53:18 
But, you know, all of us are just uh a kind of dynamical system, right?

Unknown speaker 53:23 
Now now we are certainly, we have some qualities that that hurricanes and things like that don't have.

Unknown speaker 53:28 
But again, it's a spectrum, it isn't a categorical difference.

Unknown speaker 53:31 
And we are all temporary dynamical systems in in in uh matter in um it's you know, in in metabolic space and things like that.And we can we can learn and it's entirely possible that if we had a way to stimulate weather patterns in a particular way, you might find that, wow, there's there really is some kind of habituation here, there's some kind of sensitization here.

Unknown speaker 54:30 
So, so you could.

Unknown speaker 54:31 
You could now, now a couple of things to say.

Unknown speaker 54:34 
One is that we've done this with um, uh, pathways, molecular pathways.

Unknown speaker 54:37 
This is why I was saying earlier that I don't think it just cells are the bottom level.

Unknown speaker 54:41 
Because all it takes is half a dozen genes interacting with each other to show associative learning, meaning Pavlovian conditioning.

Unknown speaker 54:46 
Like that's it, you don't need the rest of the cell, you don't need anything else, just, just from the math alone, for just a few um, interactive sub units can already give you this.

Unknown speaker 54:58 
So, could, you know, could weather patterns do it, could ecosystems do it?

Unknown speaker 55:59 
barriers between it and its goals and you have to see how clever is it to pursue it.

Unknown speaker 56:03 
Yeah, exactly.

Unknown speaker 56:04 
You have to interface to the system.

Unknown speaker 56:06 
So, so the last and and the final thing about that is, um, it's all well and good when you're testing these uh kind of primitive systems, these protocognitive systems, but one thing that people often ask is, well, what if we too are part of a some sort of giant intelligence, right?

Unknown speaker 56:16 
So, so, you know, so Gaia, so maybe, you know, maybe our or our society or or the biosphere or something is this like giant intelligence.

Unknown speaker 56:30 
Pa pa quite possibly.

Unknown speaker 56:33 
Um, I suspect that it isn't possible to get um, um, conclusive evidence of it.
I I'm going to guess there's some kind of girdle theorem or something like that around the fact that you really can't know when you are part of a bigger system that's so much smarter than you.
I think it's probably impossible to know, but I do think that we can gain evidence of it.

Unknown speaker 56:52 
And what would that look like, right?
What what what would that evidence look like?
So, I have a feeling and again, this is just, you know, uh,

Unknown speaker 56:57 
going much further than we have uh rigorous mathematics around.
I think what it would look like is synchronicity.
I think that what you would see is events that do not look causally connected at your level, but they are collected what they are connected by meaning, they are connected by um, some kind of links uh in in from the perspective of a cognitive observer.

Unknown speaker 57:23 
And those kinds of things that don't look like, well, the the the physics don't look like they should they should you know, connect together, but they do connect um on a meaning level.
I think that's what it would look like, you know, if if we if we were part of, you know, we would see patterns in the world, whether they be, you know, social patterns, financial patterns, uh, you know, movements of matter and energy in the ecosystem, whatever, that would have that would not have a neat um uh the explanation at the at the physical level, but they would make sense uh from from some from some, you know, some some higher level observers point of view.

Unknown speaker 57:59 
I like your openness and your rigorousness that that sort of you have to sort of avoid sort of um uh going astray with these wild ideas and not making them testable, of course.

Unknown speaker 58:09 
And there's one sort of deep, deep, I think a bit philosophical question I had.

Unknown speaker 58:14 
So I I read in your AI paper that I liked the meta you said, um, and when we raise a child, uh, I have a now three-year-old, but like two years ago, he would like just babble on.
I I I would know he didn't understand the meaning of those words, but he was just trying and then somehow he came to meaning, right?
So you could say it came from syntactical uh playing around with words to meaning and then you in your paper say, maybe that could be the same in AI.
I was just wondering what your thoughts are here because sort of the Chinese room experiment as sort of in philosophy, it seems quite well established that there's this great divide, right?

Unknown speaker 58:39 
This this sort of categories of syntax and semantics.
What are your thoughts here?
Can that be bridged?
And do you think um and and also how would you apply that then to to your cosmology in the end because would that mean that uh physics has semantics to it?
I'm just curious what your ideas here.

Unknown speaker 58:56 
It really triggered something reading me because you are onto something here, but

Unknown speaker 58:59 
I mean, well, the the the the first thing to say is that uh what I don't mean is that today's AIs are like human children.

Unknown speaker 59:00 
So after that after that piece came out, I got a whole bunch of emails saying, you don't know what children are, you don't know what AI is.

Unknown speaker 59:01 
Okay, let's let's be clear.
I I I know what children are.
I I have to.

Unknown speaker 59:02 
Uh the the modern modern AIs are absolutely not like human children.

Unknown speaker 01:00:00 
a good story of it.

Unknown speaker 01:00:01 
I think that what we actually have is is is a kind of scaling.

Unknown speaker 01:00:05 
And um, you know, in terms of syntax and semantics, I think that that is a that is a computationalist framing that is useful for some things, but it is not useful for many other things and I don't believe these are these are real crisp categories at all.

Unknown speaker 01:00:20 
It starts, it starts uh right at the level of remember the gap junctions, right, the the connections between the cells.

Unknown speaker 01:00:26 
It's already the distinction between between data and machine are already broken there.

Unknown speaker 01:00:31 
Because what happens is when ions flow through the gap junction, they they change the voltage of the other cell, which in turn controls whether the gap junction is open or closed.

Unknown speaker 01:00:45 
So what you have here, because the gap junction is also voltage sensitive, it can be.
So what you have here is the data, the information that comes through the machine changes the physical state of the machine.

Unknown speaker 01:01:44 
That's it.The distinction between between pure data and the hardware that all this this unchanging touring machine that just operates on hardware, gone.

Unknown speaker 01:00:52 
Biology doesn't respect that at all.

Unknown speaker 01:00:52 
So, so, um, I I think I think, you know, uh, semantics is when when we say semantics, all we all we are saying is that there is some observer that is able to squeeze adaptive saliency from whatever it's looking at.

Unknown speaker 01:00:52 
So there's a physical set of events, let's say my own memories, I am an agent that knows how to interpret my own memories, to some extent making up a lot of it.

Unknown speaker 01:00:52 
I mean, you know, confabulation is not just for language models, like we all do it all the time because our memories are very compressed, uh, uh, our our um, our engrams are very compressed representations of the past.

Unknown speaker 01:00:52 
We have to constantly reinterpret them and we add a lot of a lot of stuff to it.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
and embellish their own memories in real time and and are constantly in this process of um sense making.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
storytelling about what they are, what the outside world is and so on.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
And so there are multiple observers that can look at the same physical events and see nothing,

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
see something or see something completely different.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
And so so no, I don't think there's any any sharp distinction here.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
And we spoke we spoke about it intelligence and uh I I've listened to a lot of interviews with you and I know that you're not very keen on sort of questions,

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
philosophical questions like what is consciousness, etc. but if I'd ask you what is consciousness for and I'm talking about phenomenological, phenomenal, phenomenal consciousness, sorry,

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
what it is for uh in what are your thoughts here or your latest ideas around consciousness.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
Okay, um uh in the last couple of minutes, I guess.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
I guess the first the first thing I will say is that I'm not not keen on it.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
I think about this stuff all the time.

Unknown speaker 01:01:45 
It's just that.

Unknown speaker 01:03:16 
I I try to spend most of my time

Unknown speaker 01:03:17 
uh most of my public you know, work and like my official work on things that I think can make a very practical difference right now.And I don't I don't yet have a theory of consciousness, a new theory of consciousness to offer.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
I mean, I'm working on something but but it's not it's not useful yet, so I'm not I haven't been talking about it.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
But uh, I will I will just say this.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
Uh just just just two things.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
One is that I think that uh for exactly the same reason that we associate consciousness with brains, we should be very open to the idea of consciousness in various other body parts.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
That's the first thing.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
And the fact that you are not conscious of it means nothing because you are also not conscious of my consciousness.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
You're not conscious of your right, you know, right hemisphere's consciousness.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
That doesn't mean anything.

Unknown speaker 01:02:38 
Uh, but but but for those same reasons in terms of intelligent behavior, in terms of all the same mechanisms, uh, all of that stuff is is throughout the body.

Unknown speaker 01:03:31 
you are.

Unknown speaker 01:03:32 
So that's that's the first.

Unknown speaker 01:03:33 
The second thing is that um, what is it for?

Unknown speaker 01:03:38 
Uh, would that goes back to our platonic space concept, which is,

Unknown speaker 01:03:40 
well, well, what's the, you know, the the fact that NAND is universal or the fact that um, uh, you know, the the angles of a triangle will add up to, what's that for?

Unknown speaker 01:03:41 
So I think we should be really careful in saying that everything is for something from the standard evolutionary point of view.

Unknown speaker 01:03:42 
Some things are not necessarily for anything in that selectionist sense.

Unknown speaker 01:03:43 
Some things are just features of the universe.

Unknown speaker 01:03:44 
And I think that consciousness uh, roughly tracks um, agency, which we could, you know, we'll need another another hour to kind of talk about what I think that is, but but but basically the question of uh, what what I think consciousness is, is so so Mark Solms says that consciousness is palpated uncertainty about the outside world and what what it feels like to have to make decisions and what do I do next and and the uncertain.

Unknown speaker 01:04:48 
Okay.

Unknown speaker 01:04:49 
I think that's that's that's I like that.

Unknown speaker 01:04:50 
I think that's very cool.

Unknown speaker 01:04:51 
I would say that consciousness is the palpated uncertainty about what your own memories mean.

Unknown speaker 01:04:56 
So it's a constant real time we we it doesn't feel like that, it's it's not how we describe it, but I think what it really is under the hood is our constant sense making.This idea that as an agent, it's not just about looking backwards and explaining what happened, it's about looking forwards and saying what is the best story I can tell about myself in the outside world that helps me know what what do I do next in this uncertain dangerous world.

Unknown speaker 01:04:24 
And so that that that is what I think consciousness is, and I think uh, you know, we we have there there are many open questions about why it feels certain ways and whatever.

Unknown speaker 01:04:24 
But fundamentally, uh, that that's that is what it's for because because without that process, I I don't think anything could survive, but also I think it's uh, it's an important.

Unknown speaker 01:05:34 
some fundamental property of the universe that you you cannot tell a simple selection this story about it.

Unknown speaker 01:05:39 
Michael, thanks so much.

Unknown speaker 01:05:41 
And um, I just have one and maybe you can answer short.

Unknown speaker 01:05:48 
Now, I think you've already given an answer with this last answer you gave me.

Unknown speaker 01:05:49 
But I thought just a final question for you, how is your work change your your personal life?

Unknown speaker 01:06:05 
I mean, your outlook on life or just or you say that you're a father of two.

Unknown speaker 01:06:07 
Because I can imagine working on stuff like this, it it does something to how you're just uh live your life.Yeah, yeah, I think I think it does.
Um, and I think uh, I think uh, there it it has it has and I I think we need a lot more time to talk about this, but I think it has it has it has real implications for um, for ethics and for um, how you relate to other other beings and how you think about um, enlarging your your um,

Unknown speaker 01:06:20 
your

Unknown speaker 01:06:21 
sort of light cone of of of compassion

Unknown speaker 01:06:23 
and and things like that.

Unknown speaker 01:06:24 
Um, yeah,

Unknown speaker 01:06:25 
and and so yes, I I definitely have some thoughts about it, but I think I think we'll need a different.

Unknown speaker 01:06:28 
Thanks so much for your time and uh, I wish you a very good week.

Unknown speaker 01:06:32 
Thank you, Michael.

Unknown speaker 01:06:33 
Thank you so much.Yeah, thank you.

Unknown speaker 01:06:34 
It was a great discussion.

Unknown speaker 01:06:35 
Oh, thanks.

Unknown speaker 01:06:36 
Bye.

Unknown speaker 01:06:36 
Thanks, bye.

Unknown speaker 01:06:37 
Unfortunately, we had to wrap our conversation a bit abrupt,

Unknown speaker 01:06:41 
as I only had one hour with Michael Levin, who has a very full schedule.

Unknown speaker 01:06:46 
But if you have any further questions, um, to Michael Levin, please leave them in the comment section and I'll do my best to see if I can arrange another conversation with this great mind who is working on a true paradigm shift.Thanks so much for watching and please like and subscribe.

Unknown speaker 01:06:10 
See you in one of our next videos.
