 
 

Unknown speaker 00:00 
they regenerate every part of their body.

Unknown speaker 00:01 
So you can cut them into pieces and every part will regenerate everything that's missing, including the brain, the head, every every.

Unknown speaker 00:06 
And by the way, their memories.

Unknown speaker 00:08 
They are incredibly cancer resistant.

Unknown speaker 00:12 
And they are immortal.

Unknown speaker 00:14 
If we understood how this works and that's what we are studying and many, many other people in the field are studying this, that is the future of medicine.

Unknown speaker 00:22 
Welcome to Target Cancer Podcast.My name is Dr. Sanjay Juneja, also known as the Onc, I'm a hematologist oncologist.

Unknown speaker 00:30 
Now I'm just going to speed through that because I am so excited and I mean this, it might be the person that was the most intimidatingly brilliant person that I have spoken to.

Unknown speaker 00:37 
His name is Dr. Michael Levin and he looks into the regenerative uh and cellular regeneration and that's intentionally um redundant.

Unknown speaker 00:45 
He is a distinguished professor in the biology department and Vannevar Bush chair at Tufts University and serves as the director for regenerative and developmental biology.

Unknown speaker 00:54 
And basically, he one debunked and just kind of did away with this whole concept of the blueprint and codes for you to have cancer and not have cancer over time.

Unknown speaker 01:02 
And he talks about why the flatworm, this planarian is literally the absolute holy grail of what we try and hope to achieve as human beings, not just in injury and trauma and and and nervous central nervous disease, but also in cancer.

Unknown speaker 01:19 
The flatworm is absolutely wild.

Unknown speaker 01:21 
We talk about not cancer from a DNA, you know, uh level or cellular injury, but really this web that exists all over in our bodies and all of these different areas and it's getting out of that electric system or web, that communication or harmony that basically invites and uh propagates cancer.

Unknown speaker 01:42 
So, Dr. Levin, I hope I can call you Mike, I am beyond humble to have you.

Unknown speaker 01:49 
Thank you for being here.

Unknown speaker 01:50 
Sure, yeah, call me Mike, very happy to be here.

Unknown speaker 01:50 
Yeah, great to talk to you.

Unknown speaker 01:51 
You were telling us and earlier on our pre-call on how it's really not a blueprint at all, but really you were using this term hardware and saying that all of these tools are in in the genome, right?

Unknown speaker 01:59 
When we talk about genome, we're talking about all of those different things as you were saying that help us orchestrate in a very dynamic, second to second way in time and matter and physiology, everything that's supposed to happen or proliferate, I guess to a degree.

Unknown speaker 02:16 
Could you expand that on that a little bit more just so we can correct ourselves in our understanding of that process?

Unknown speaker 02:21 
So, so let's let's let's work backwards to ask ourselves, what is the fundamental thing that goes wrong during cancer?

Unknown speaker 02:27 
And I sometimes give a talk called why don't robots get cancer?

Unknown speaker 02:30 
And the reason robots yet uh don't get cancer is because the the way that that architecture works is that the collection of parts is doing something.

Unknown speaker 02:37 
Let's say you've got a robot and the collection of parts is doing something, but the parts themselves are passive.

Unknown speaker 02:44 
The parts themselves have no ability to have goals of their own and therefore they never defect from the from the uh the the function of the whole, okay?

Unknown speaker 02:56 
They never they never uh go off and do something different.

Unknown speaker 03:04 
Biology isn't like that.

Unknown speaker 03:16 
They well, well, adapt is is a funny word because that sounds like like evolution on a on a uh on a much longer time scale, right?

Unknown speaker 03:23 
We're talking about this idea that that uh the living organism in in biology, the living organism is has uh a kind of um computational goal directed activity at every scale.

Unknown speaker 03:36 
So, not only are your organs uh and your tissues trying to do various things, but so are the individual cells.

Unknown speaker 03:40 
And so, it's that uh it's that computation that individual cells are doing that allows them to work together on very large goals like building whole organs, maintaining the whole body against aging and cancer and so on.

Unknown speaker 03:54 
But that means that occasionally that process is going to break down.

Unknown speaker 04:00 
So what occasionally happens is that uh individual cells will disconnect from the network and it's it's an electrical chemical and and and mechanical network that keeps all of these cells harnessed towards a kind of collective intelligence of maintaining large scale organs.

Unknown speaker 04:08 
When individual cells defect from from that, it's because they disconnect from that network and they basically become like amebas.

Unknown speaker 04:10 
You know, we are made of single cells.

Unknown speaker 04:16 
The single cells used to be entire organisms, right?

Unknown speaker 04:25 
Evolutionarily before they became multicellular.

Unknown speaker 04:25 
And so, so what happens is that uh these individual cells basically roll back to a kind of ancient single cell lifestyle where the goals are very simple.

Unknown speaker 04:26 
Every cell wants to proliferate, meaning meaning every single cell wants to become two cells and they want to go where life is good and food is plentiful and so on.

Unknown speaker 04:27 
And so this is basically metastasis.

Unknown speaker 04:32 
Basically these cells are treating the rest of the uh body as just external environment.

Unknown speaker 04:39 
So that boundary between self and world when they're all connected into this network, the boundary is the whole body and the outside world is out is out there.

Unknown speaker 04:59 
When when that network is broken, these individual cells, the boundary shrinks to just the level of a single cell.

Unknown speaker 05:00 
he's just outside world to them, right?

Unknown speaker 05:03 
They're not part of the organism anymore.

Unknown speaker 05:03 
And so this is where we get into the whole point of DNA. Uh, the genome does not in any way, and this is not a controversial uh thing.

Unknown speaker 05:14 
This is this is a fact, although people don't emphasize it enough.

Unknown speaker 05:14 
Uh, the DNA in no way codes for the actual form and function of your body.

Unknown speaker 05:19 
The what's in the genome is not a description of the organs you're going to have, how those organs are uh arranged relative to each other, how they grow, what they do.

Unknown speaker 05:30 
These things are not directly in the genome.

Unknown speaker 05:34 
If you actually read the genome, what you see is protein sequences, you see a description of how to make the tiniest level hardware that every cell gets to have, all these little proteins.

Unknown speaker 05:40 
Now that hardware is amazing because when every cell has that correct hardware, they are able to do all of the gold directed computations that allow them first of all to maintain cellular um kinds of activities, but but but but more importantly to work together as a collective intelligence that then ends up building the various organs in the body and so on.

Unknown speaker 05:59 
And so there there is a blueprint, but but that blueprint arises from the physiology, it arises in the computations of that collective intelligence of cells.

Unknown speaker 06:12 
It is that blueprint is not directly written in the in the DNA.

Unknown speaker 06:12 
So, so the hardware software analogy is actually pretty good here, although a lot of people push back on uh thinking about living things as computers, and that's because today's computers don't capture most of what's interesting about biology.

Unknown speaker 06:23 
I mean, that's true.

Unknown speaker 06:24 
But the thing that is but the thing that is good about this computer analogy is that it allows us to to to very carefully separate what you know about the hardware.

Unknown speaker 06:30 
And so if you have a computer and um uh you wanted to debug a program or you wanted to get it to do something good, would you be working at the level of the copper and the silicon?

Unknown speaker 06:47 
I mean, you might if you were a CPU designer and there are certainly people who do that, but the vast majority of powerful things you can do with a computer don't take place by altering the properties of the of the copper and the silicon and the aluminum and everything else that's in there.

Unknown speaker 06:54 
They take place at the level of uh reprogramming and taking advantage of the native uh uh intelligence of the machine, the interface that it gives you to control the whole.

Unknown speaker 07:03 
You know, it's the algorithm that makes the uh that makes the the electrons in the machine dance to a particular uh computation.

Unknown speaker 07:11 
So, so my claim is is just very simple that that for certain uh kind of low hanging fruit, you know, single gene diseases and and and and maybe some cancers that are caused by very specific mutation, it may be possible to address that on the genetic level, maybe.

Unknown speaker 08:00 
we shouldn't be focusing on the hardware.

Unknown speaker 08:01 
anymore than we do that in our in our information technology.

Unknown speaker 08:06 
We should be focusing on the native intelligence of the cells and tissues and on communicating with that intelligence to push it towards specific behaviors like building a correct organ, maintaining us against against aging and so on.

Unknown speaker 08:19 
So this this is uh that this is this is how I see the problem.

Unknown speaker 08:21 
That's I mean, that's amazing.

Unknown speaker 08:22 
I'm like healing a cut.

Unknown speaker 08:23 
Like somebody if you really think about it, it's like you have your skin, you have your hand.

Unknown speaker 08:26 
And then if you got a cut, it's like if you've ever asked the question, how is that cut healing?

Unknown speaker 08:30 
Like how how does it know to kind of rev up or ramp up the basically the tissue so that you can cover that open flesh wound.

Unknown speaker 08:31 
That is a very like simple, you know, macro example of all of the dynamic processes and and signaling and all these things that just kind of say, oh, now I'm going to give you a nudge.

Unknown speaker 08:32 
You need to give this.

Unknown speaker 08:33 
You need to not do that.

Unknown speaker 08:34 
And I guess one example maybe like, we haven't talked about this enough really for a cancer podcast, but when we talk about a stem cell, everyone on my social media, what's a stem cell?

Unknown speaker 08:35 
And pluri, you know, pluripotent, meaning pluripotent.

Unknown speaker 08:36 
It's like, you know, more or less it has all of that hardware.

Unknown speaker 08:37 
And I know all of them do in their exomes, but but it's it's ready.

Unknown speaker 08:38 
And I was explaining one to my residents when they follow me on the auto.

Unknown speaker 08:45 
transplant, which basically means for myeloma,

Unknown speaker 08:47 
they're like, how can we not do allo, which means your own self.

Unknown speaker 08:54 
Well, then auto, when you look at that differentiation, you see that, you know, that that stem cell and it goes down to like a blast.

Unknown speaker 09:01 
And then it starts differentiating and identifying itself more into the uh lymphocytic blast,

Unknown speaker 09:05 
and then even further down, you can see basically the the B cells,

Unknown speaker 09:08 
and then you see plasma cells.

Unknown speaker 09:12 
So I'm like, look, myeloma is coming from a a a colony of of identical plasma cells.

Unknown speaker 09:15 
So I'm like, I don't need to go way up here to hopefully make that thing go away.

Unknown speaker 09:44 
helped it uh differentiate itself.

Unknown speaker 09:47 
That's when we use these terms with solid tumor cancers.

Unknown speaker 09:49 
Differentiate differentiated, well differentiated, you can recognize the pathway uh of growth that they came and what kind of, you know, family they belong to as you were saying earlier, versus, uh, can we not even distinguish, you know, in which direction they came.So there's that whole concept on a kind of leukemia or blood cancer level.

Unknown speaker 09:22 
But the question has to be asked then when you're like, look, Sanjay, you have all the hardware, but please don't make a mistake on saying it's somehow encoded to just facilitate in this direction.

Unknown speaker 09:22 
What is that?

Unknown speaker 09:22 
Is that divinity?

Unknown speaker 10:00 
explaining that you have a whole bunch

Unknown speaker 10:01 
of very powerful people that are actually still and have every tool and every part in a

Unknown speaker 10:03 
hardware fashion to be able to then proliferate into all of a sudden making the embryo

Unknown speaker 10:06 
and all those little things and then that becomes a colon and then that becomes a hand and we are just a whole bunch of ingrates that never think about that process.

Unknown speaker 10:16 
That's a very wild concept on these they just is it

Unknown speaker 10:19 
inherent?

Unknown speaker 10:25 
Because I've heard you use the word intelligence and memories twice, you know, and Siddhartha Mukerji kind of pinpoint and goes like, remember, now cells aren't smart and they don't have which I know, you know, he was saying they don't escape selection pressure from chemo.

Unknown speaker 10:34 
It's not like they're like, oh, this is a bad problem, let me fix it.

Unknown speaker 10:44 
But you're like, well, yes, but theyI'm actually not sure that's true at all by the way.

Unknown speaker 10:44 
Because the physiology and all these elements and the and the chemistries and everything around that cell is basically going back into the hardware and saying, hey, we need to change something, right?

Unknown speaker 10:51 
Like that those these are the signals we're talking about.

Unknown speaker 10:57 
We had Dr. Paul Billings who talked about exosomes.

Unknown speaker 11:00 
Exosomes kind of the sweat and

Unknown speaker 11:01 
and almost like a a kind of tip off on what's happening in a specific environment.

Unknown speaker 11:07 
So like if you have something in the lungs or if you have something like colon,

Unknown speaker 11:10 
as I understood it, that's just one little element to be able to say, I think if I was totally blind, I could see what's happening in here in this part of the body versus here just based on these things I'm able to collect outside of the cells.

Unknown speaker 11:21 
And I don't know if that's like a the most accurate example that I can make, but what is it that's telling you to have that cascade?

Unknown speaker 11:27 
And I loved the example that you said, you know, and this sounds this is almost offensively simple, but if you've seen Avatar, you see all of a sudden how nature starts have like working beautifully together and these things happen and everything's in harmony.

Unknown speaker 11:40 
And that's what I saw when you said, well, one cell stops and it stops caring about what that environment needs to be in the most optimal ideal way for whatever its purpose.

Unknown speaker 11:47 
And instead thinks of it on a cellular almost like a rogue level.

Unknown speaker 11:50 
Like this is the one, you know, part of the military that stopped listening to the captain or or atrial fibrillation.

Unknown speaker 11:57 
Everything is beautifully related when you have a correct electric signal.

Unknown speaker 12:01 
They they know not to be too fast and they're listening to the to the main, you know, person that says beep, beep, beep.

Unknown speaker 12:06 
And what happens in atrial fibrillation is that cell just stops saying, I'm not listening anymore and I'm just going to go with my inherent signal and then you go and try to burn it.

Unknown speaker 12:14 
What number one, there's a whole bunch of things that cause that.

Unknown speaker 12:17 
And number two, what are some of the things that you're looking at to say, how can we make that cell that went rogue go back into that macro environment or is the answer you can't?

Unknown speaker 12:27 
And that's why ultimately surgery, if you could take out the one cell before it's 300 million that you need to see on a CT scan, you just got to get it out because it'll never go back into that beautiful harmony.

Unknown speaker 12:36 
Um, okay, a few things.

Unknown speaker 12:37 
Uh, first going all the way back uh to your point about the cut and the and the wound in the skin.

Unknown speaker 12:42 
So the more amazing example of this are uh regeneration events, for example, things like in a salamander, right?

Unknown speaker 12:47 
If a salamander loses a limb, and it might be at the elbow, it might be at the wrist, it might be at the shoulder, wherever it is, those cells are going to grow a perfect replacement for that limb.

Unknown speaker 12:57 
And in fact, then the the the the most amazing thing is then they're going to stop.

Unknown speaker 13:05 
When do they stop?

Unknown speaker 13:08 
They stop when a correct salamander limb has been completed, that's when they stop.

Unknown speaker 13:11 
And so, so we see that this is a homeostatic process.

Unknown speaker 13:17 
The body and some animals are much better at it than others.

Unknown speaker 13:20 
Humans can do it a little bit and and you know, deer can regenerate antlers and so on.

Unknown speaker 13:27 
But but amphibians are really good at this where uh if the body is deviated from the normal shape,

Unknown speaker 13:30 
the cells will try to minimize that error and then they stop when the error is very low.

Unknown speaker 13:35 
So basically it's a it's a homeostatic process.

Unknown speaker 13:38 
They know the set point.

Unknown speaker 13:41 
The set point is the anatomical pattern.

Unknown speaker 13:43 
So, so this is quite quite literally the the individual cells don't know the pattern, but the collective intelligence does.

Unknown speaker 13:51 
The the um the group groups of cells can make decisions about anatomical shape, just like in our bodies, in our in our brains, we we're a bag of neurons and these neurons work together to know things that individual neurons don't know, right?

Unknown speaker 13:57 
So you and I know things that individual cells don't know.

Unknown speaker 14:00 
And the exact same thing happens in the body.

Unknown speaker 14:03 
Collections of cells have memories of specific patterns that they will try to reproduce upon damage.

Unknown speaker 14:06 
And so

Unknown speaker 14:07 
So that's the first thing I wanted to say.

Unknown speaker 14:09 
Uh, the second thing has to do with

Unknown speaker 14:10 
How do you communicate?

Unknown speaker 14:10 
I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm

Unknown speaker 14:11 
I'm getting to that.

Unknown speaker 14:11 
Yeah, I'm getting to that.

Unknown speaker 14:11 
Okay.

Unknown speaker 14:11 
Um, so, so the second thing I wanted to say about the stem cells, right?

Unknown speaker 14:12 
So stem cells are really important as the building blocks of whatever you're going to build.

Unknown speaker 14:17 
But the problem is stem cells, right, when when when a stem cell becomes a particular type of cell,

Unknown speaker 14:20 
that's all well and good, but what we're really interested in is three-dimensional structure.

Unknown speaker 14:23 
It's no good to have a mix of of stem cell derivatives in the wrong pattern because that's a teratoma.

Unknown speaker 14:33 
You don't want to just a random random jumble of things, you want a healthy organ, you want a healthy embryo.

Unknown speaker 14:36 
And so, so just having stem cells is if you know, if I said, here, I've got this brick that can turn into any little part of the house.

Unknown speaker 14:39 
I'm going to dump a pile of these in your front yard, all good, right?

Unknown speaker 14:41 
Like, it's not all good because you've got the you've got the parts, yeah, that's great, but now you need to you need to be able to assemble them.

Unknown speaker 14:47 
And and so, so it's not just about the stem cells, it's about the signals that that allow all of these cells to work together towards specific patterns.

Unknown speaker 15:00 
the

Unknown speaker 15:01 
the uh what we've discovered over the last uh I don't know probably 20 years is that um

Unknown speaker 15:05 
the way that this collective intelligence of cells holds these patterns and measures the error relative to those patterns and takes actions, meaning remodeling and re and and and things like that, is exactly the same way that the neurons in your brain hold memories, allow you to pursue goals and uh and and measure um error relative to uh things you're interested in.

Unknown speaker 15:28 
electricity.

Unknown speaker 15:29 
So all of these cells make electrical networks that compute.

Unknown speaker 15:31 
We know electrical networks can compute because all of neuroscience is built on that and some of our uh information technology is built on that.

Unknown speaker 15:38 
Electrical networks are very good at storing memories, at making decisions and at uh uh implementing behavior towards specific outcomes.

Unknown speaker 15:47 
So what you have is a collection of cells, every cell in your body, not just your neurons, but every cell in your body,

Unknown speaker 15:55 
has the ability to process electrical information and when they're uh connected together into a large network, that network is able to process um information and keep memories that individual cells cannot do.

Unknown speaker 16:04 
And those memories are literally the shape of your body.

Unknown speaker 16:07 
Now, we have we have developed over these years, we have developed the tools that allow you to physically see those pattern memories.

Unknown speaker 16:14 
The way it works is we have these compounds, they're fluorescent uh voltage sensitive dyes.

Unknown speaker 16:19 
And so basically one thing you can do is you can bathe your your embryo or your regenerating or your tumor and we've done all this in these dyes and you can literally see the pattern that uh the cellular collective is uh holding as what the correct pattern is.

Unknown speaker 16:29 
And we can see defects in that pattern for birth defects, for injury and for cancer.

Unknown speaker 16:39 
You see defects in that pattern.

Unknown speaker 16:43 
And so our job as as workers in cancer medicine is to

Unknown speaker 16:47 
learn to uh figure out how you correct that pattern.

Unknown speaker 16:50 
Because if you correct the pattern, the cells will build the appropriate thing.

Unknown speaker 16:52 
And so we've done a lot of work, for example, in the frog model where we can induce we can we can put in human oncogenes and they get tumors.

Unknown speaker 16:59 
And what we see during that process, so let's say a nasty K mutation or something like that, right?

Unknown speaker 17:02 
Uh what you see is that the first thing that happens when that when that um and there are many other ways that this happens, it's not just by mutation for sure, but but but it's real easy to to do this uh with with K and things like that.

Unknown speaker 17:14 
The first thing that happens is that uh these cells electrically disconnect from their neighbors.

Unknown speaker 17:19 
And as soon as they disconnect from their neighbors, they're back to a unicellular lifestyle like their ancestors of billion year ago years ago.

Unknown speaker 17:29 
They basically start to uh at that point the because now

Unknown speaker 17:30 
they're not connected to anything.

Unknown speaker 17:31 
Their boundary is is just around the surface of that cell.

Unknown speaker 17:34 
The rest of the embryo is just environment or the rest of the animal is just environment to them at that point.

Unknown speaker 17:38 
And so what you see is that they disconnect and they metastasize and they do all these all these kinds of things.

Unknown speaker 17:43 
What we can do is uh and and we've shown this in the in the frog model and we're now trying this with human glioblastoma.

Unknown speaker 17:50 
What you can do is is is artificially alter the connectivity of those cells with their neighbors.

Unknown speaker 17:56 
This is not done by applied electric fields, there are no waves, there are no frequencies, no magnets, no radiation, nothing like that.

Unknown speaker 18:02 
What we are doing is using the interface, we're exploiting, hijacking the electrical interface that every cell has.

Unknown speaker 18:04 
And why does it have it?

Unknown speaker 18:14 
Because that's how evolution builds bodies in the first place.

Unknown speaker 18:23 
Every cell has an electrical interface.

Unknown speaker 18:24 
Does this apply to even like air and humidity, like everything that our cells are in tune with, do they have electrical that electrical relationships with like the chair on our bottoms and all that stuff.

Unknown speaker 18:35 
No, no, no, I'm I'm talking about.

Unknown speaker 18:37 
I'm talking about individual cells have individual cells have uh specific proteins on their surface, which allows them to communicate electrically with their neighbors.

Unknown speaker 18:46 
It's like um and by electrically you mean like pardon my ignorance like you mean like proton electron atomic stuff.

Unknown speaker 18:52 
Uh the the stuff that I'm talking about are are protons, sodium, potassium, chloride, these kinds of small charged ions.

Unknown speaker 19:00 
Oh, okay, yeah, yeah.

Unknown speaker 19:01 
And but it's but it's literally, I mean that is electricity, it every cell has a voltage across it, right?

Unknown speaker 19:20 
And that voltage can be uh, you know, 70 millivolts, right?

Unknown speaker 19:21 
I mean that's that's quite quite significant.

Unknown speaker 19:23 
And so, and so that's how they communicate with each other.

Unknown speaker 19:25 
It it literally is an electrical network, exactly as in our brain.

Unknown speaker 19:38 
I mean, we already have a precedent for all of this because we know how uh electrical networks in our brain process information, store memories and uh underlie gold directed behavior.

Unknown speaker 19:40 
Okay.

Unknown speaker 20:20 
calcium

Unknown speaker 20:20 
channels, sodium channels,

Unknown speaker 20:21 
chloride channels, and so you can open and close

Unknown speaker 20:23 
some of those channels if you knew which ones to open and close,

Unknown speaker 20:26 
and that would bring the cell

Unknown speaker 20:27 
back into the correct electrical

Unknown speaker 20:29 
connection with the whole network.And so we've done this.

Unknown speaker 20:12 
We've actually done this.

Unknown speaker 20:13 
And so so we can suppress tumors, we can um

Unknown speaker 20:16 
uh normalize existing tumors in the frog model.

Unknown speaker 20:19 
Now, we have one one paper on uh glioblastoma and a couple papers on uh breast cancer, human breast cancer with uh uh Madeline Nuden.

Unknown speaker 20:27 
Uh that where where we're using these these tools to actually normalize existing cells.

Unknown speaker 20:32 
So this is not about let's be clear.

Unknown speaker 20:34 
This is not about a new kind of chemotherapy to kill those cells.

Unknown speaker 20:38 
We are not trying to kill them.
I mean, as you said, it would be nice if if we knew the first one to go off, we could get rid of that, that's great, but that's I'm not sure how how that's going to happen.

Unknown speaker 20:45 
So, so what we're doing is we're we're not trying to kill them and we are not trying to repair the DNA.

Unknown speaker 20:51 
So the uh in the case of the the um oncogenic mutations, they're still there, but the DNA isn't what drives.

Unknown speaker 20:57 
What drives the outcome is the physiology.

Unknown speaker 21:00 
It's what do those cells uh think they should be doing,

Unknown speaker 21:02 
meaning having an ameba-like lifestyle and exploiting the organism or should they be working in a group to build

Unknown speaker 21:08 
or or maintain a healthy organ.

Unknown speaker 21:11 
Well, so what I was going to say was like, in the same manner, so, you know, when we say cancer in the Latin root word, it means like unregulated cell growth.

Unknown speaker 21:17 
And unregulated meaning like it is left that, you know, that harmonious environment or that commune, for example.

Unknown speaker 21:20 
And somebody says, I want to leave the commune, I want to go do things on my own.
And then basically you're saying like, come back and get back into the same habits, the same communication.

Unknown speaker 21:31 
You know, when you were speaking at first, I was like, well, probably what happens, you know, a lot of times is when it gets back into that network, and all of a sudden it just gets like annihilated because they're like, well, you look very bad.

Unknown speaker 21:40 
But it sounds like what you're saying is conceivably, if I'm not misunderstanding, when they get filed back in line, get back in order, come back to that commune,

Unknown speaker 21:47 
that they actually, can they differentiate from that ugly little nasty, you know, colony, can they actually somehow differentiate back into nice, like the GBM cells, back into nice non-GBM cells too.
It's not just that they are now reidentified and blown up, but that they could actually like just behave themselves and stop being so unbridled and and and go back into their nice normal nature.

Unknown speaker 22:08 
Yeah, so in our in our frog work, that's exactly what we see.

Unknown speaker 22:10 
These cells are not killed off by their neighbors.
They go back and they participate and they make a nice normal skin, normal muscle, kidney, whatever.

Unknown speaker 22:18 
Uh they go right back to right to the right uh the right role.
Because because it is not about differentiating cells and it is not about fixing the DNA.

Unknown speaker 22:27 
It the behavior of the cell is guided by the physiology ultimately, right?
And if the physiology is brought into line by their neighbors in the electrical network, they will do the right thing.

Unknown speaker 22:36 
Whether that's possible in GBM, uh time will tell.
Now, we have we have one paper that shows partial uh normalization of human GBM in in vitro.
We will see, you know, obviously we're pursuing this now to see if this will work in vivo.
I don't know.
Uh but but I'm hopeful that that the exact same thing uh is going to be possible.

Unknown speaker 22:55 
There are there are animals that do this.
So, so what for example, salamanders, if you have a tumor in a salamander and you trigger regeneration, meaning that you trigger this really strong process of error minimization on the collective level, they will actually normalize the tumor, it turns into normal tissue, the same thing in flatworms that we study.

Unknown speaker 23:13 
So there are and the same thing in embryos, right?
So so mouse embryos have been reported to normalize cancer cells that are injected into them.
So there's a lot of precedent for this idea that what's wrong in cancer is not the hardware, although sometimes that's how it starts, it's the it's the dysregulation of collectivity.

Unknown speaker 23:29 
It's the dysregulation of having a group mind, literally, that is trying to achieve a particular anatomical outcome.
Now, there is a there's also an interesting thing about you say that you mentioned somebody else, you had somebody else on that told you that cells that get um selected for resistance to chemo are not uh, you know, they're not they're not thinking about it.

Unknown speaker 23:57 
Yeah, yeah, so so so I want to I want to push back on that.

Unknown speaker 25:00 
because

Unknown speaker 25:01 
I mean, okay, they're

Unknown speaker 25:01 
they're not human level smartly in

Unknown speaker 25:03 
the sense that no no cell is sitting there saying, wow, that's chemotherapy.

Unknown speaker 25:06 
I'd like to I'd like to uh, you know, get around that.

Unknown speaker 25:09 
Okay.

Unknown speaker 25:10 
Yeah, I'd like to not do that.

Unknown speaker 25:11 
Right.

Unknown speaker 25:13 
So, so obviously cells are not doing that.

Unknown speaker 25:14 
But uh, it is it is long been known that evolution is very um, strongly modified by the intelligence of the creatures being evolved, right?

Unknown speaker 25:22 
There's there are all kinds of effects um, that uh, that that modify how selection plays out when when you're uh, when your creatures are smart.

Unknown speaker 25:31 
And cells are not passive agents.

Unknown speaker 25:33 
They absolutely make decisions.
Uh, they have memories of the past, they have a little bit of predictive capacity going forward.
many cells starting in with Paramecium and going up to to of course, the human cells have it too.

Unknown speaker 25:44 
Uh, lots and lots of work on this in the field called basal cognition, also called diverse intelligence.

Unknown speaker 25:50 
And to think that uh, individual cells are not adjusting themselves in the light of stressors such as chemotherapy, right?

Unknown speaker 25:56 
that they're not that that they're um, computational pathways that they have are is are not be are not adjusting and therefore altering how they get selected.

Unknown speaker 26:10 
I think that's uh, that's that's a big mistake.

Unknown speaker 26:12 
I think that much like with every type of evolution, intelligence absolutely shapes how that plays out.

Unknown speaker 26:17 
And we know cells, I mean, we have in my lab, we've we've developed a few examples of this, many other people have studied this.
Cells are not passive agents, they are smart.
They're not human smart, but they're smart enough.
I have, well, I so many questions.

Unknown speaker 26:31 
Okay.
So, let me just rapid fire and you can just a la carte, you can pick and choose the three questions I have at this moment.
I'm just like, this is better than espresso.

Unknown speaker 26:39 
I'm okay.

Unknown speaker 26:40 
Number one.

Unknown speaker 26:41 
So, to that, to that concept, how does, this is one question.

Unknown speaker 26:44 
How does this whole concept then of like inherited genetics, you know, with, you know, uh, Lynch and Drom and all these things, as well as this whole concept of antioxidants to decrease DNA damage and, you know, smoked meats are bad and alcohol and etc.

Unknown speaker 27:00 
How does that play into that electric, the basically the breakdown or the escape from that electric kind of harmony and coordination.
That's one question I have.

Unknown speaker 27:08 
And then the second question I'm thinking, when you say memories, so you already very beautifully uh, and almost um, embarrassed, but talked about the hardware and having all those different things in the axon.

Unknown speaker 27:19 
But you've used the word memory a couple of times and, you know, obviously I know how to store something in hardware on a computer, but how is it like knowing kind of what the landscape was prior in that salamander and be able to just say, okay, now Q X Y Z because I stored it here.

Unknown speaker 27:36 
Like, did it store in a protein, did it store in So, those are my two at the very beginning baseline questions.

Unknown speaker 27:42 
The third one obviously would just hijack 20 years of work of yours, which is how are you going in and just hitting that one discrete, I mean, it is so small a cell.

Unknown speaker 27:51 
How are you actually influencing the electrical communication in that tiny little dot of an area.

Unknown speaker 27:53 
Yeah.

Unknown speaker 27:54 
All right, let me.

Unknown speaker 27:54 
Avoiding DNA damage is really smart.

Unknown speaker 27:58 
Uh, even though, I mean, I've I've I've emphasized in in in this discussion, I've emphasized the physiology, the bioelectric signaling, all that.

Unknown speaker 28:09 
But none of that is going to be optimal if your hardware is bad.
So, so yes, we don't program our computers with us with a soldering iron anymore, but at the same time, if your materials, if your, if your materials are defective, it's very unlikely that you're going to get a good outcome.

Unknown speaker 28:13 
So, the DNA encodes the the hardware that uh, that every cell gets to have, and it is in everybody's interest to keep that hardware functioning optimally.

Unknown speaker 29:53 
It's like having.

Unknown speaker 29:54 
It's like.

Unknown speaker 29:54 
It's like.

Unknown speaker 29:55 
You have any role?

Unknown speaker 29:57 
So look, uh, I, I, I'm not an MD.

Unknown speaker 29:58 
I have.

Unknown speaker 30:00 
Uh, no, uh, you know,

Unknown speaker 30:01 
nobody should be listening to me about uh, the diet or or advice or any of that stuff.

Unknown speaker 30:06 
I stay dehydrated constantly, like I don't, I don't drink water.

Unknown speaker 30:09 
Now I'm like, should I drink water?

Unknown speaker 30:11 
I I I I think you should, but not specifically because of the bio.But not because of the bioelectrics.

Unknown speaker 30:17 
Uh, again, I'm not an MD.

Unknown speaker 30:18 
I can't I can't tell anybody how much water to drink.

Unknown speaker 30:20 
All I can tell you is I personally uh, have learned that my my dehydration and I've always been dehydrated has has led to some issues and it's got nothing to do with bioelectrics.

Unknown speaker 30:29 
So for your for your third question as far as uh, how do we, how do we actually do this?

Unknown speaker 30:33 
So, so again, let's keep in mind what we're trying to achieve.

Unknown speaker 30:42 
We're trying to achieve specific bioelectrical states, meaning correct patterns that that help the cells know what to do, uh, by taking advantage of the interface that every cell has.

Unknown speaker 30:56 
That interface is a bunch of ion channel proteins, as these little proteins that sit on the surface of every cell, and they act like little batteries to let uh, to let um, current in and out, yeah?

Unknown speaker 31:00 
To to let specific ions, potassium, sodium, chloride and so on.

Unknown speaker 31:01 
So the way we interface, the way we control that interface is through ion channel drugs.

Unknown speaker 31:05 
There's also some stuff we can do with light, but that's that's really mostly for the laboratory, it's not really for clinical use, I don't think.

Unknown speaker 31:11 
Uh, it's it's drugs.

Unknown speaker 31:13 
So, so, so something like 20% of all drugs are actually ion channel drugs, meaning the intent and the intention is for them to hit various ion channels and turn them on and off.

Unknown speaker 31:22 
These drugs, people take them for epilepsy, for uh, various cardiac disorders, uh, all all kinds of things.

Unknown speaker 31:30 
Many of them are already human approved.

Unknown speaker 31:33 
And so what we're doing is we we call them electroceuticals.

Unknown speaker 31:34 
And these are ion channel drugs that if you knew which, which drugs to uh, to use at what time, you could control that interface, that electrical interface, basically playing it like a piano, uh, to get the correct overall pattern.

Unknown speaker 31:48 
So you need a compute, you need, you need a software to to help you figure out how that works and we're working on machine learning kind of AI tools to to help us choose those drugs.

Unknown speaker 31:59 
And then, and then you need those drugs.

Unknown speaker 32:00 
And so, uh, the fact that the cells are small doesn't matter because we're not trying to micro target it.

Unknown speaker 32:05 
We are, um, basically in our, in our, uh, application so far, we soak the whole animal.

Unknown speaker 32:12 
We just, we just soak the whole animal.

Unknown speaker 32:14 
So they're systemic drugs.

Unknown speaker 32:15 
Is it, I'm going to say something that I hope you have to think about for half a second, which would be an hour for a normal human.

Unknown speaker 32:20 
Is it somewhat somewhat the similar to like saying, okay, when a heart is is is in a bad rhythm and you do the EKG shock, you're basically trying to re

Unknown speaker 33:00 
all right.

Unknown speaker 33:01 
You're trying to reset the polarization and depolarization that's gone a right.

Unknown speaker 33:04 
And there's not this beautiful cascade.

Unknown speaker 33:05 
You want to go back to basically having the SA node beats.

Unknown speaker 33:08 
That's what you're trying to do when you hit these the ECG jockers.

Unknown speaker 33:11 
Is it similar in a very, you know, barbaric sense to that.

Unknown speaker 33:15 
No, it's a good point because because the thing that the thing that is similar about that is that when you do this, you are not committing and and maybe maybe long term, of course, you put in a pacemaker and whatever.

Unknown speaker 33:21 
But but but the immediate act of of applying that stimulus, you are counting on the cells taking over from there.

Unknown speaker 33:27 
You are not at that moment saying, oh man, I need to move a bunch of sodium this way and a bunch of potassium that way and then I need to sell to contract and then I need to that's not what you're doing.

Unknown speaker 33:30 
You're you're saying, if I can get the whole system to a correct state, it will take it from there.

Unknown speaker 33:33 
The normal rhythm will take over.

Unknown speaker 33:35 
And so what you're counting on, what you're exploiting is that you are working, you're not working with a passive material, you're working with a material that actually knows what to do if you can push it into the right direction and then it will take over from there.

Unknown speaker 34:18 
to do is is they they the the network already knows because because during embryonic development it built all of the organs and all of the parts and everything.

Unknown speaker 34:21 
We need to push it to a state from which it's going to take over again and start doing all that stuff.

Unknown speaker 34:22 
And that's that's the the exact same goal is is how we do regenerative medicine.

Unknown speaker 34:22 
When we grow back and we're working on growing back limbs and eyes and things like that.When you do that, the hope isn't that you're going to micromanage every stem cell and all the gene expressions in every cell.

Unknown speaker 33:45 
Not at all.

Unknown speaker 33:45 
The goal is, I'm going to uh push these cells to a state where they will start up once again what we know the collective already knows how to do, which is to build all these organs.

Unknown speaker 33:45 
Yeah, exactly.

Unknown speaker 33:45 
So like that.

Unknown speaker 34:44 
when people ask, it's like, well,

Unknown speaker 34:45 
first they try the to reshock the heart because you hope that that one focus of atrial tissue if you have to fib,

Unknown speaker 34:52 
like there are instances when you shock it, it actually just stops being rogue and doing its own inherent pulsing, just like listens and you're you're good.

Unknown speaker 34:56 
And then when it fails is when basically it still just re like basically rebreaks itself out of that electric cascade or circuit and regulation.Yeah,

Unknown speaker 34:22 
and you know, some some of these things are are hardware issues, so you might have some cells that are damaged or some some uh, you know, problems like that.

Unknown speaker 34:22 
But some of these issues are totally physiological in nature.

Unknown speaker 34:22 
There is nothing hardware wrong.

Unknown speaker 35:00 
there's

Unknown speaker 35:00 
in in epilepsy in the brain, there's a phenomenon known as mirror focus, where

Unknown speaker 35:03 
you have somewhere you have a piece of brain tissue that's causing epileptic seizure, but there's actually it's mirrored in another part of the brain, but there's nothing physically wrong with it.

Unknown speaker 35:12 
It's a it's a physiological, it's a physiological issue, it's a remembered pattern.

Unknown speaker 35:16 
And there's also a notion of cardiac memory actually.

Unknown speaker 35:19 
So, so there are people who work on cardiac memory, which is this idea that

Unknown speaker 35:22 
when you start up taking the wrong rhythm, you just remember the the tissue remembers and it keeps on that wrong rhythm, not because there's anything wrong with the hardware, it's just holding on to a different memory and it can be pushed towards towards the right thing.

Unknown speaker 35:34 
So it's really important to understand that that that not all problems and and probably, I would guess the majority of problems are not in fact hardware problems, you know?

Unknown speaker 35:43 
There are some, you know, there are some genetic diseases that are like, you know, you're missing an enzyme, some metabolic enzyme, I mean, that's that's it, that's a hardware issue.

Unknown speaker 35:50 
But but I think most of the the issues of of uh of medicine are going to boil down to these persistent physiological patterns and the answer is going to be retraining of the tissue, it isn't going to be rewiring the genome or anything like that.

Unknown speaker 36:02 
This is a great, so I try to debunk things on social media and one of them is, you know, it

Unknown speaker 36:05 
it just makes me like very worried and sad that there's so much work to be done.

Unknown speaker 36:14 
People don't get screened because they're like, I don't have a family history, which at that point you're just talking about hardware stuff, but on top of that, 90% of people don't have, you know, and it's not due to an inherited or something that was passed down, it's just living.

Unknown speaker 36:21 
Like it's that kind of error.

Unknown speaker 36:23 
And I always said it was 100%, I didn't say it was 100%, but I suggested that you get these mutational errors or hardware problems and that is what spits off into cancer.

Unknown speaker 36:32 
Now, like I've learned on all these podcasts, it's not just that that that it could be a a contributor, but really it's this it's also even if the DNA's beautiful and pretty, like it's just that is there a correlation though that where age would make you want to have some electrical autonomy or independence over time, because the argument I use about error is saying, look what happens in cancer incidence in the 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, the older you live, there's more cancer.

Unknown speaker 37:11 
Yeah, yeah.

Unknown speaker 37:12 
I mean, uh that part that part is still uh largely unknown, but it seems very likely that aging and the loss of um that regenerative ability with with age and the loss of the the the let's say the degradation of some of these bioelectrical patterns could be due to could be leading to increased uh cancer susceptibility.

Unknown speaker 37:33 
I want to close, I'm going to have to go in a couple minutes, but I want to close with just one example that um

Unknown speaker 37:45 
We work with

Unknown speaker 37:46 
we work with an animal uh called a flatworm and you may think that wow, that's a flatworm, we're humans, yeah.

Unknown speaker 37:50 
Yeah, we're all, we're all built mostly of the same hardware really.

Unknown speaker 37:56 
So, uh what these flatworms are telling us uh is is what's actually possible and I think it's really critical to remember that um anything that that is possible, if physically possible is eventually doable with technology.

Unknown speaker 38:04 
So I firmly believe this is the future of of medicine for humans.

Unknown speaker 38:12 
And by the way,

Unknown speaker 38:12 
the thing with this worm is, uh they regenerate every part of their body, so you can cut them into pieces and every part will regenerate everything that's missing, okay?

Unknown speaker 38:20 
including

Unknown speaker 38:20 
including the brain, the head, everything, everything.

Unknown speaker 38:23 
They regenerate, they regenerate their brain.

Unknown speaker 38:25 
Uh and by the way, their memory, so when their brain regenerates from a tail, yeah, this is this was first discovered in the 60s and then we sort of confirmed it with modern techniques in in 2013, but yeah.

Unknown speaker 38:36 
So they regenerate every part of their body, they are incredibly uh cancer resistant and they are immortal, okay?

Unknown speaker 38:45 
They they do not age, so there's no such thing as an old planarian, they every you know, they just continuously sort of re uh regenerate any any aging cell that they have.

Unknown speaker 38:54 
So now, we now know, it is known that you can be an animal that is that repairs itself after injury, does not age and resists cancer.

Unknown speaker 39:05 
It is possible.

Unknown speaker 39:06 
So therefore, that is our uh, you know, if we understood how this works and that's what we are studying and many, many other people in the field are studying this.

Unknown speaker 39:13 
If we understood how this works, that is the future of medicine.

Unknown speaker 39:19 
And by the way, they do this with a really messy, uh terrible genome.

Unknown speaker 39:20 
Every cell can have a different number of chromosomes, their genome is a complete mess and it would take I I you know, we have some understanding of why that is, but but but it's not because they have this pristine genome that they keep so clean, that's not at all it.

Unknown speaker 39:29 
It's because uh they are uh they their cells are masters of maintaining the correct pattern despite all kinds of noisy hardware.

Unknown speaker 40:00 
in there, in their.

Unknown speaker 40:01 
DNA.

Unknown speaker 40:02 
And for that reason, the algorithm is now so good, they can build a perfect worm despite all kinds of all kinds of noise.

Unknown speaker 40:08 
Why is this not a Stephen King Netflix like viral documentary?

Unknown speaker 40:10 
I mean a movie, this is insane.

Unknown speaker 40:13 
I was thought of cockroaches as one of those like most resilient kind of like freaks of nature because they just hang around.

Unknown speaker 40:18 
But that's wow.

Unknown speaker 40:19 
Two, two, two one second questions.

Unknown speaker 40:21 
Number one, this whole, do you, do you know if there's anything about calcium channel blockers, hydrochlorothiazide, they all kind of mess up our sodiums and our calcium levels and stuff like in the interest of blood pressure.

Unknown speaker 40:31 
Is there any relation at least because I can see this on social media, that's why I don't take modern meds, that that actually affects on a cellular level, you know, anything or is to be determined?

Unknown speaker 40:40 
Uh, the only, the only risks will be for embryos.

Unknown speaker 40:45 
So, so if you're an embryo, then some of these drugs may be teratogenic depending on the embryo.

Unknown speaker 40:50 
If you're an adult and you need this this medication, the risks are are generally far outweighed by the actual benefit.

Unknown speaker 40:59 
If you if you need.

Unknown speaker 41:00 
They're.

Unknown speaker 41:00 
There's very not what's messing with that electric field web harmony thing that you're obviously studying your whole life.

Unknown speaker 41:05 
for for for for an adult human, if you have a cardiac problem that requires some sort of calcium or sodium drug, your your cardiac issues from not taking it are going to be way worse than anything that's for for an adult, right?

Unknown speaker 41:18 
Embryos are are a different story, but for an adult, this is absolutely not a reason not to take medication you actually.

Unknown speaker 41:24 
Yeah, no.

Unknown speaker 41:24 
Yeah, I wasn't going to make say that, but okay.

Unknown speaker 41:26 
And number two, are you regenerating limbs in your house?

Unknown speaker 41:31 
Have you done this before?

Unknown speaker 41:34 
Have you regenerated on humans and not telling us?

Unknown speaker 41:35 
Uh, no, I'm doing none of this in my house.

Unknown speaker 41:44 
I'm doing all we are doing all of this in a in a laboratory at Tufts University and at a company called Morphaceuticals Inc.

Unknown speaker 41:44 
Uh, we are not regenerating human limbs.

Unknown speaker 41:54 
We are working at this point in mice.

Unknown speaker 41:57 
We've we've done it in frogs, and we've regenerated limbs in frog now, and we've we're taking that technology and working on it in mice, and hopefully someday, of course, in human patients, someday.

Unknown speaker 42:04 
We're not ready.

Unknown speaker 42:05 
Uh, we don't have any human data at the moment.

Unknown speaker 42:07 
Uh, this is this is very early basic science and uh, we are pushing it forward.

Unknown speaker 42:08 
And this is all done.

Unknown speaker 42:10 
Our liver.

Unknown speaker 42:10 
Our liver does it, right?

Unknown speaker 42:11 
Our liver regenerate.

Unknown speaker 42:11 
Correct.

Unknown speaker 42:12 
Correct.

Unknown speaker 42:12 
And it's the only thing really.

Unknown speaker 42:13 
In the human, I mean, human children can regenerate their fingertips.

Unknown speaker 42:17 
Uh, kids will get their fingertips chopped off, will regenerate them.

Unknown speaker 42:20 
This was amazing, Mike.

Unknown speaker 42:21 
Thank you so much.

Unknown speaker 42:21 
You blew my mind.

Unknown speaker 42:22 
Thank you.

Unknown speaker 42:22 
Appreciate it.

Unknown speaker 42:22 
Good to talk to you.

Unknown speaker 42:22 
Thanks.

Unknown speaker 42:23 
Bye bye.

Unknown speaker 42:23 
Yeah, bye.
