Título: Patterns of Form and Behavior Beyond Emergence by Michael Levin
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RcW65tBxRA
Duración: 73.6 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

This talk is called patterns of form and behavior beyond emergence. This is my attempt to think about how patterns from the Platonic space inform, evolved, engineered, and hybrid embodied minds.

The paper describing all of this in more detail is here. It's actually a preprint that's going to be a chapter of a book and you can download it download it here.

The basic structure of what I'm going to say today has these components. First of all, I want to talk about the notion of patterns that are basically generalized types of forms of structure and behavior. In other words, they're specific forms in various spaces. Then I'm going to talk about morphogenesis as an example, kind of a model system that we use which we are going to describe as a homeostatic process that aims toward a specific form. In other words, it's a it's a navigation of a space and a kind of error reduction to try to get to a specific form. And this is in contrast to the mainstream paradigm of uh complex morphologies arising by emergence from open-loop complexity, things like cellular automata, and so on. So this is this is going to be a contrast to that. Then having having established why I think morphogenesis proceeds toward specific forms, we're going to ask where do these forms come from? That is the set points of the homeostatic process, where where do they actually originate? And the answer I will give attempts to go beyond this idea of selection for a specific shape in evolutionary history and the specificity of a prior environment. So so a history of of the genome interacting with an environment as being predictive of forms that can serve as targets for morphogenesis. So where else besides environment and genetics can these forms come from?

And then the model that I will try to defend is this idea that there is the space. It is a structured space of patterns that serves as the source for these kinds of forms. Now I'm going to call it a Platonic space not because I'm trying to stick close to the views of Plato to whatever extent we even know what those are, but simply to begin by a kind of consilience with what Platonist mathematicians say they're doing in studying a structured established space of pre-existing patterns. And so I'm going to talk about how I think these patterns serve as both causation and a kind of explanation for patterns that we see in in biology. And for this reason I think physicalism is insufficient. And so I'll talk about that. I'm not going to focus on physics very much. I hope the physicists will do this later in this series.

And then I'm going to mention the idea that it actually doesn't take a very complex interface. In other words, it doesn't have to be a living biological body. And I'll briefly mention how even very simple interfaces can get some of these these forms ingressing through them. And then we'll talk about how this works in in brains, in very simple minimal algorithms, and of course chimeras. And at the end I'll simply point out that what we have here then is a research program with a very practical empirical component. We can study the contents of the metric of that space and we can try to understand the mapping between the pointers or the interfaces which are the physical objects that we make, whether living or non-living, and the patterns that ingress through them. So this is the the structure of the argument that I'll give today. The first thing to note is that we all arise versus via this specific process, this this journey from from being something that is people think amenable to the science of chemistry and physics. So this is a quiescent oocyte, a little a little blob of chemicals. And then through this amazing self-assembly process known as embryonic development, we create self-assemble the the form of our body, so the anatomy, and of course even our the form of our behavior. And and perhaps we end up something as complex as this which then will make statements about not being a machine and and things like that. So this is this is a slow gradual process by which our bodies and our minds come to be. And this by the way is not the end. There's some other interesting things that I've covered in other talks where the the morphology of the body can actually um undergo some some some really a profound transformations. And so now we can talk about what what's actually going on here when when we make this this transition.

So the first claim that I would like to make is that there's really a profound symmetry between the forms of the body, that is anatomy or morphology, and the forms of behavior. In other words, kinds of minds. I'm going to argue that these are part of the same class. And interestingly enough, Alan Alan Turing I think saw this pretty clearly. He was very interested in intelligence and reprogrammability and things like that. And and in particular kinds of unconventional embodiments of mind. So so going beyond the biological embodiments of mind. But he also wrote this amazing paper called the chemical basis of morphogenesis which basically looked at how chemicals can self-organize during early embryonic development. And you might wonder why would somebody who is interested in computation and intelligence be looking at chemicals during early development?

And I think he actually probably saw this this this idea that there's a there's a really um deep symmetry between the self-assembly of the body and the self-assembly of the mind. So so let's let's look at what some of these shapes are. First of all, we can we can look at some some really intricate and definitive biological forms. So here are some diatoms. These are these are very small things. These are these are tiny on the level of a single cell. Okay? And all of these are quite specific and and and we need to try to understand why exactly these shapes form and not something else. The same thing of course the same question arises during the embryonic development of multicellular forms. So an embryo reliably gives rise to a standard standard body, standard target morphology.

And if we look inside, we find a very stereotypical set of organs and tissues that almost always does the right thing.

These cells build all the correct organs, correct shape, size, in the right location, orientation, and and configuration. And so we need to understand where do these patterns come from? Some of these patterns are very very complex such as the actual three-dimensional body of this fly and some are kind of stripped-down two-dimensional kind of two two-dimensional projections of a different kind of body. So so a virtual this this fly is running a kind of a virtual ant morphogenesis program on its wings to fool predators as to the presence of a semi-ant nearby.

We really need to understand the the origin of all of these invariant patterns, how it is that they arise including large-scale things such as the these termite colony structures, the spider webs built by a spider. And all all of these structures no more specified in the DNA directly than are the the direction of the structure of the spider web or the specific structure of the termite colony, right? All all all of these things are not hardwired in the in the DNA.

The DNA actually specifies the proteins, in other words, the microscopic hardware that all the cells get to get to have.

But after that, the actual outcome is the is the physiology, the the the real-time uh in vivo physiology that runs on that on that hardware. So these are the kind of forms these these kind of biological forms that we need to understand of of structure. Now forms of behavior.

And so again, we can start at the single cell level. This is a Lacrymaria. It's a single cell organism. You can see it has some some remarkable behaviors that are kind of the envy of soft matter roboticists and and things like that.

And I so so it has all these all these local competencies in its own tiny little cognitive icon despite the fact that it doesn't have a brain or a nervous system.

But actually even below this level, if we ask what what what is this what is the single cell made of? Well, it's made of molecular networks. And it turns out that if you model molecular networks, you'll find out that just by virtue of their connection to each other, certain certain kinds of networks can do up to six different kinds of learning, habituation, sensitization, Pavlovian conditioning, so associative learning.

All of these things they can do simply by virtue of their structure. You don't need evolution or any particular fact of physics. This is this will become important later.

This is kind of a free gift from from the mathematics of networks that they can that they can do this. So so um even the even even the material from which the cells are made is already on the on the spectrum of of agentive materials because it does have not only this learning capacity, but as we found recently that learning actually increases its causal emergence. So these are these are things that are very very important to neuroscientists and other other people who study a behavior of different kinds.

Now we can look at a couple of different behaviors in some of these very simple simple organisms. This is for example a Physarum slime mold. And what you see it doing during the first few hours is it sort of grows outward kind of kind of evenly. Now you'll notice there's one glass disk here. There are three glass disks here. There's no food. There are no chemical gradients. It's just just a mass. But what it as it turns out, what it's doing during this time is gently tugging on the the soft agar that it grows on. And what it senses are the vibrations that come back to it and it can tell the strain angle of the different masses. And so, then what it will do is reliably reach out to the heavier mass, and you can play all kinds of games of stacking the discs on top of each other and things like that.

So, it's it's gathering information about its environment here. Once it has processed that information, it figures out where the larger mass is in there, and there it goes. And uh it has all kinds of interesting internal uh mechanisms for for doing computations. For example, if you uh if you inject uh uh fluorescent beads uh into this into the system, you find out that there are these flows, but each one of these branch points, each one of these tiny little branch points, is controllable, independently controllable. So, the whole thing could be potentially a um uh a hydraulic computer, right? It has the ability to uh independently control the the signaling through each through each branch of this enormous network.

So, these is these are are some \{{}quote} \{{}unquote} simple behaviors that these systems um can do. Now, the thing is uh we we find it pretty easy to recognize sort of high agency behaviors. So, here's this here's the squirrel. It's going to set up a little accident scene like this, right? So, so so very intentional um in a moment it's going to uh look up just to to make sure that its owners are catching what's happening here. It wants some attention. And uh and and we can we can all recognize this because it's it's very similar to ours. It happens on the same time scale, uh same roughly uh spatial scale. Uh these these creatures um kind of live in a similar world that we do. They want some of the same things that we want. We we can recognize this behavior easily. Although, I I will I will just point out that the actual degree of agency in these kinds of things is can cannot be derived from pure observation. So, and for example, you can see things like this, and you know, uh you just by looking at this, you can't you can't actually tell what what is going on here, and whether there's uh you know, to to to to what degree does does this creature understand what's going on with the uh with a tool that it's holding. But, you have to uh you have to do perturbative experiments. And more importantly, to really understand patterns of behavior, we have to free ourselves from uh our obsession with three-dimensional space as the only space in which uh problem-solving behaviors can can happen. Um we we as humans are are kind of primed to recognize behavior of medium-sized objects doing medium things medium uh doing things at medium speeds in three-dimensional space. And so, we're we're okay at recognizing intelligence in uh in those kinds of uh those kinds of uh scales. Uh but, actually biology has been navigating spaces uh for a very long time, uh long before muscle and brain appeared. And so, before neurons and muscles allowed us to navigate three-dimensional space, living matter was navigating the space of gene expressions, space of physiological states, and the thing that we're going to talk mostly about here, which is uh anatomical morphospace.

And so, um Chris Fields and I wrote this paper to try to try to show what's common to all these spaces is the ability of biology to navigate and to do the kind of uh perception-action loop that we um uh associate with intelligence. And And that that loop, that control of behavior, can be done in many other many other spaces. In fact, we I'm I'm not sure that three-dimensional space is is is privileged at all, you know. I think I think to some extent we constructed cognitively just like we we can construct all these all these other spaces.

And so, uh on the one hand, we can look at evolution as basically uh progressing some of the same uh tricks through various spaces as uh as as as uh complexity increase. So, metabolic spaces, physiological, and so on, all the way up through behavioral and eventually linguistic and other spaces. On the other hand, you know, this this this all looks reasonable, but it's really very much in the eye of the beholder. Because, for example, a bacterium could increase its ability to gain sugar by either physically moving up the sugar gradient, or by taking a step along transcriptional space, and turning on a different gene that is a different enzyme um that allows it to metabolize a completely different sugar.

So, either one of those would get its job done, and it is not clear at all that um the bacterium in the way that it processes information views those two actions as happening in different spaces. And in fact, um Physarum, this this slime mold, in this case, its behavior is its morphogenetic change. That is how it does behaviors, by changing its shape.

So, so uh this this this neat division into various problem spaces is is very much uh up to up to the observer who's trying to understand what's going on.

So, this is so so this in in this first part of the talk, what I've what I've tried to show is that there are very specific and characteristic patterns both of anatomy and behavior, and that these are just uh members of the same class of patterns that can exist in many many different uh different uh spaces.

And the reason this is important is because towards the end of the talk, I'm going to try to uh point out that uh it's the same space of patterns, this this Platonic space, that I think is uh is responsible for uh the presence of uh of of both uh anatomical shapes and behaviors, and probably many other patterns in uh in biology and in another in other disciplines.

So, the next thing that uh that we have to look at is um this this idea that that these patterns are not simply uh emergent in a kind of uh open-loop feedforward manner from um subunits executing simple rules, but actually are very specific patterns that are uh that are pursued by goal-directed or homeostatic uh mechanisms. In other words, these are these are these are um discrete targets that are uh implemented by specific uh mechanisms.

And uh this is I I I like James's definition of intelligence, uh which is uh the same goal by different means. And I think that's that's exactly what's happening in the in the biological substrate. And if you're interested in in this topic, there's a whole there's a whole talk um about this here.

So, the first thing to point out is that uh very simply, uh anatomies show this kind of homeo homeostatic error minimization process. Here's a here's an axolotl.

It's an amphibian that's highly regenerative. If you amputate anywhere along this along this limb, the cells will uh basically spring into action. Uh they will work to regrow that limb, and then they stop. And that's kind of the most amazing part of the regenerative process is that it knows when to stop. When does it stop? It stops when the correct axolotl limb has been uh completed. So, so there's this uh there's the ability of the system to detect when it's been deviated from the correct target morphology. Then it works to get closer to that target morphology. And then, when the error is within uh acceptable acceptable levels, uh then uh then it stops. And so, um this is this is this this this kind of thing is pattern homeostasis or anatomical homeostasis.

And uh and it shows you that it's not just uh an example of uh of of of cells doing what they do. If you try to deviate it from their goal, it will work really hard to spend lots of energy to try to get back to where it's supposed to be.

But, um what's what's really interesting about this is that it's actually not just uh repair of damage. It is not just minimization of of error after some sort of injury. There's a really interesting uh top-down causation um situation going on here. And you can see that when uh when people grafted the tail to the side of the flank here, what happens after a little while is that that tail turns into a limb. It remodels in place. And in order to do that, the for example, the cells at the tip of this tail have to turn into fingers.

Now, why are they doing that? There's nothing wrong up here. They're tail tip cells sitting at the end of a tail. Uh but, what's happening is that the error signal that uh that is it operates at the level of the entire body. In other words, there's no error with with the cells. There's nothing wrong there. But, there is an error at the level of the entire body because it knows that um a tail doesn't doesn't belong there. And what happens is that error now propagates down to the cells and to the molecular machinery that has to uh do certain things to turn uh tail cells into a limb cells, and to build finger structures, and uh and so on. And so, this is this is very interesting that the local order actually uh obeys a global plan. These things these things uh filter down to all the way from from a global anatomical plan to uh the specific molecular events that have to happen here.

And uh I think this is uh this is this is very similar to what happens cognitively. And And again, this is this is kind of drawing that parallel between uh the processes that shape the body and those that that shape behavior.

When uh very abstract high-level cognitive uh plans and memories uh can uh uh be transduced into the movement of ions across your muscle membranes. So, when you wake up in the morning, and you have very very abstract goals, in order for you to execute those goals, uh eventually um potassium and calcium ions have to flow across various muscle membranes in order for you to get up and and and do the do the behave carry out the behaviors. So, voluntary motion is the same kind of transduction of very high-level abstract uh target patterns into specific changes of physiology, and ultimately chemistry inside the inside the body. And the final thing um I'd like to show is that this uh this kind of process is uh I we we've we've we've seen that it's not just uh repair of damage. Uh it is it is uh also involves this kind of top-down control.

There's another feature to this, which is which is problem-solving. Um and it's the reuse of available tools to solve a problem and get to the same goal by different means. And so, this is one of my favorite examples.

This is a a cross-section through a kidney uh tubule in the uh in the newt.

And what you can see is that there's a lumen, and then there's eight to 10 cells that form it by uh uh working together to create this kind of uh, this kind of tubule. Well, one thing you can do experimentally is force the cells to have, uh, extra copies of their chromosomes, in which case the cells get much bigger, but the newt stays the same size. And so, if you take a cross-section, you find out that, um, the reason the way that that happens is that actually fewer of these larger cells then work together, and they make exactly the same structure. And and you can keep doing this until you make really gigantic cells, and then what you find is something striking. One cell will bend around itself, and again, keep that same structure. Now, the reason this is amazing is that this is a completely different molecular mechanism. This is cell-to-cell communication, normal tubulogenesis. This is cytoskeletal bending. And so, what the system is doing is when it's placed in a in a unexpectedly new situation, it's not just that the environment changed you. I mean, you you you know, if you're a newt coming into the world, you you can't even trust your own parts, right? Your own your own components are unreliable.

And so, now suddenly your cells are way bigger than they should have been, and so, what it's able to do is to use other tricks in its molecular repertoire to solve the problem that it has. Which again looks like a lot of IQ tests that you see when they give you a set of objects, and they say, "Can you uh, can you solve a problem with it within in a in a new way, in a creative new way with the with these tools that you have?" So, again, so so this the system, uh, is able to is able to exert, uh, a very, uh, kind of, uh, high-level problem-solving competency to reach a specific pattern. That's the importance here is that there's a very specific pattern that it's trying to reach, and uh, whether it's whether it's repair or or different kinds of top-down causation or reuse of different molecular affordances, all of these things are aimed at creating specific goals. Now, the the these these targets, these goals can be rewritten. That's one of the one of the amazing things about um, homeostatic kinds of mechanisms is that it isn't just feed forward, uh, where it's a very very difficult to know what to change in the low-level rules to give you the correct final outcome. These, uh, these these kind of processes that explicitly have a goal state that that, uh, or a set point that they aim towards, that set point can be rewritten. And so, what we've done here is taken these planaria, which normally very reliably, uh, regenerate. So, this middle fragment will normally grow exactly one head and one tail. Um, we've we've we've modified the set point, and it turns out I don't have time to go into it here, but it turns out that that set point is stored bioelectrically, and when you rewrite that set point, you can make it say two heads instead of one, and the cells are perfectly happy to build two heads. In fact, then then that information is kept uh, stably, it's a memory. So, then if you keep cutting these two-headed animals, you will continuously get more two-headed animals. So, what I'm showing you here is that not only is there, uh, uh, uh, a kind of very specific form that, um, that the processes pursue, but that form is rewriteable because it is in fact, uh, selected as an, uh, uh, an end point or a or a set point towards which these, uh, these mechanisms uh, strive. And you can see here these are these are here these, uh, two-headed flatworms uh, hanging out in this, uh, in this video. Um, now, not only can we shift the set point to to say two heads instead of one, we can actually also, uh, move them towards the, uh, the patterns of different species. So, we can take this nice triangular, uh, head-shaped planarian, cut off the head, bioelectrically, uh, change the information that is driving the regeneration, and instead of the triangular head, you can make a flat head like a p. felina. You can make a round head like this s. mediterranea, or of course, the normal triangular head.

Um, not only the shape of the head, but actually the distribution of the stem cells and the shape of the brain changes, too. And so, what's happening here is that much like in the previous example where I showed you that we can get, uh, two-headed permanently two-headed worms with no genetic change, yeah, we we we are editing the bioelectrical pattern memories, not the uh, not not the not the genetics. Um, the genetics is perfectly wild type. It creates, uh, hardware, cellular hardware that is quite happy to visit different attractors in that anatomical space.

Now, some of these attractors belong to other species, right? Um, we can also make some things that that, uh, don't look like any any any species any known species. And so, the idea is that there is this this landscape, uh, in in anatomical morphospace that contains specific attractors into which, uh, the systems will will try to, uh, try to reach even if you try to deviate them in various ways. And you can push the system to prefer different uh, different attractors. Okay. So, so this biological interface in this this issue will come up again, uh, in a few in a few minutes that that basically what you have here the the DNA codes for a particular, um, hardware that that acts as an interface to various patterns in that space, and that interface can be dialed into different different patterns in that in that morphospace.

Okay. Uh, so so what I've showed you, uh, in the first part is that there are very specific, uh, types of forms of anatomy and behavior that that the biological, uh, systems, uh, work really hard to try to reach, and they have all kinds of cool tricks to try to, um, try to implement those those specific forms.

And so, now it's time to think about where do these forms actually come from?

If you're going to have shapes and behaviors that the system is going to try to reach these very stereotypical, uh, target morphologies, what where where do they actually come from? And what I want to show is that, uh, is some of them are reasonably explained as uh, being having been selected for, but others are not, and it's quite clear that the hardware is able to find truly novel forms in that space that don't appear to have anything to do with a past history of selection. So, the first thing um, to look at is this so so these are again those the the planarian flatworms, and I've shown you that we can make them have either extra heads or heads of other species, but we can also push them into regions of that space that doesn't seem to belong to any species. In other words, it's, uh, we we can make these spiky forms, these cylindrical forms that aren't even flat anymore. And, um, these kind of, um, uh, these kind of, uh, hybrid hybrid forms. And so, the idea here that that that we've been studying for years and that I showed you a just a few examples of is that groups of cells are kind of collective intelligence. Why? Because they become aligned towards specific goals in this, uh, morphospace of of patterns, and that they navigate that space and they try to reach specific patterns even, uh, even though, um, they might encounter various uh, serious challenges like you saw in the in the newt and and and so on. So, so so the question the question then is what what are these what are the available attractors, and and where do they come from? Um, you know, some some of them even they're quite remarkable, but but some of them are, uh, have an evolutionary, uh, a reasonable evolutionary explanation. So, for example, here these acorns are so reliable in making oak leaves that we can sort of be forgiven for thinking that, okay, well, that's what the oak genome encodes. It encodes this particular kind of pattern, and this is what it knows how to do. But then along comes a non-human bioengineer, this little little wasp, and the little wasp, um, hacks the morphogenetic competency of these leaves, and actually create makes the the plant cells build these kind of structures. You know, they they don't come from the insect cells, they come from the plant. And so, if not for for this kind of, um, for the for this thing prompting them, we would have never known that these, uh, reliable flat green leaf cells are actually capable of making these amazing round spiky red and yellow, um, structures. And so, so what we see here is that, uh, the standard form, the leaf itself is like a like a basically a tiny pinpoint in that latent space. It's one outcome. But around there are some some really interesting other things that this exact same hardware can do. And so, uh, in asking, uh, where it is that the actual information for making the various options are written, in other words, where are the different, uh, the different set points of these processes specified, the different forms, um, in in in biology, there are there are kind of, uh, two criteria for answering this where does it come from kind of question. Um, if you want to say that a specific medium contains the information for a specific, uh, phenotype for a specific outcome, you have to do two things. You have to first of all be able to rewrite it, okay? So, whether it's genetic, meaning the the the genome, or whether it's bioelectrical, the pattern memories like we do in planaria, uh, what you have to do is you have to show that if you change the information in the medium, then the anatomy actually changes. Okay? And that and that's one one important piece of the evidence to be able to say that, okay, that that is where the pattern was written. It it was certain things are written in the genetics, and many other things are written in the physiological patterns.

Uh, and uh, here here in these in these two papers, um, we we discuss, uh, what what it what it really means to, uh, to think about where uh, where these patterns are actually encoded. But the the other thing that's really important, uh, which in order to say that some kind of, uh, uh, uh, process is the origin of these patterns is that you have to be able to show a history for the specificity. In other words, uh, um, in in biology, you have to be able to say that the reason it is this pattern and not some other pattern is because there is a history of interaction with the environment, meaning evolution and and selection, that, uh, explains why it is that this is the particular outcome that, uh, that you have. Okay? So, so so biologists love these two kinds of explanations, the ability to rewrite a specific medium and get, uh, the um, a predicted outcome, and to show a history of specificity of a a given pattern, uh, is there because the material has faced a certain, uh, history of, uh, selection, uh, in the environment in the past.

But actually, there is there is a third, uh, interesting kind of source for patterns. So, here's just Here's just a particular example. This is This is a very simple formula in complex numbers, and this is a Hallie plot, which uses also a simple simple algorithm to plot the the pattern that is indicated by this by this function. Now, it is incredibly rich. It's kind of amazing that that this this this rich structure comes from this like such a tiny little little formula, and if you if you change these functions very slowly and make frames, you can make you can make videos that look like this. Just an incredible amount of order and structure packed into a tiny little seed like this.

Again, we have this notion of a kind of a an interface or pointer into a into a of a much richer a much richer space.

If you know, if this was a compression, it would be would be just insane levels of of compression, but but this is this is kind of a pointer to this this mathematical this this mathematical object.

And what's important about the Well, it's also kind of cool that it doesn't hurt that that these things look very kind of very organic-looking. Um all all of these.

But what's important here is that if you try to understand if you want to explain why this thing has the particular shape it has, that answer is not going to be found in any fact of physics. There's nothing about the physical universe that determines what the shape of this is going to be. Okay, the shape the shape is not a consequence of any any kind of physical process. And there's no history. There's no history of selection. We can't say that this looks the way this look this looks because there were many other variants and they all died out. That is that is not what what what happened here. So, where where does this come from? All all of these this this this very particular very specific structure. If it's not physics and it's not selection, where does it come from? And having seen that that's possible, right? That that the space of mathematical objects has all kinds of patterns in it that are that are distinct from from what physics and history gives you, then then we can ask is is this relevant for biology? Can we find novel forms that that do not have of selection for their specific properties? And so here I will show you two of them. First something we call xenobots. And so, this is a biological a biological construct made from the extracted cells of a of an early frog embryo. We take them off of the embryo, we put them in this dish. They could have done many things. They could die, they could crawl away from each other, they could form a flat monolayer like cell culture. Instead, what they do and you can see that you can see that here, they they sort of merge together and they form they form this little um this little construct. The flashes Oh, I'll mention in a minute. These are calcium. The flashes are calcium signaling. And as these cells, so each one of these little tiny things is a single cell. This is a close-up, and you can watch this this little this little group of cells. It's kind of really funny that it looks like a little horse.

They they sort of move as a as a unit.

They they they wander over here. They kind of interact with some other cells here. There's a There's a little There's a little calcium flashes as the cells are are um interacting with each other, and eventually they all kind of coalesce into this into this thing. And then so so this is this is the shape, and there's all kinds of intermediate shapes, and then here's the here's the actual xenobot. It's swimming along by waving cilia, these little hairs that are on their outer surface. And it has lots of specific behaviors. It can go in circles, it can patrol back and forth.

It can do these kind of collective group behaviors. If we track their motion, they can they can do all kinds of interesting things. Um we can we can make them into weird weird shapes like this swimming donut.

The calcium the calcium signal is kind of kind of interesting. Um the uh There's there's no there's no neural tissue. There's no there's no there's no brain here. There's no neural tissue. But the But But there is a lot of calcium activity, and calcium is a read-out of cellular computation, and a lot of neuroscience uses calcium signaling as a as a proxy for um the computational activities that are going on. And And And And many people are developing tools to decode. This is generally a field called neural decoding, where people try to decode the the dynamics of these flashes to try and understand what what what a brain is doing. So, as I said, there's no there's no brain here, but we have been using in collaboration with um with with Josh Bongard's group and Sara Walker and and Olaf Sporns, um we've been we've been looking at uh trying to use uh metrics that that come from neuroscience to understand both the connectivity pattern and the actual dynamics of this to see what what might be going on here. And And And what kind of computation this might this might suggest. And And And all of that is is is is yet to come.

Those analyses are are are going to be published in a bit.

Uh So, so what you've seen is is is novel morphogenesis in these in these xenobots. And And now I want to show you some some behaviors. This is This is one thing that they do called kinematic self-replication. And uh This is This is some some work um done with Josh Bongard's lab. And all all the xenobots the biology for the xenobot stuff was done by Doug Blackiston in in our group. And then Sam Kriegman did the computational analyses.

What What you're seeing here is that when provided with a with a material substrate, so each one of these little little tiny dots is basically loose epithelial cells thrown into the arena with the bots, they run around and they do something amazing. They collect them into little piles, and then they polish these little piles like that. And because they're working with an agential material themselves, these are not passive beads, these are actually cells, each one of these piles matures into the next generation of xenobots. And guess what they do? They they go and they collect the the cells into new piles, and they make the next generation and the next. So, we call this kinematic self-replication.

So, that's one one interesting thing.

Another interesting thing is we found out that these xenobots have a really altered transcriptome. They have hundreds of genes expressed differently than the cells would have if they had been inside the embryo. And lots of lots of interesting genes get upregulated.

One one just just as one example, one thing that gets upregulated is a cluster of genes related to the perception of sound and mechanical stimuli. And so, we saw this and we asked and this is the work of Vyas Pai in this in this uh in this paper, and we asked, is it possible that these things now could could actually perceive perceive vibrations or perceive sound? Because again, the these these are these are genes that they would not otherwise in their normal environment in the embryo, they would not be expressing all these genes. And it turns out that yes, if you put a speaker under them and you you play a certain sound during during that that sound, they change their behavior in a very stereotypical way that you can detect. And after the sound is turned off, they go back to their normal normal behavior. So, so what what what what you've seen here is that is that these cells taken out of their normal context reconfigure themselves into a new kind of living construct that has different behaviors.

It has different transcriptomic profiles, so it has a different pattern in transcriptional space, in behavioral space, and of course in anatomical space. I want to show you one more version of this.

This is This is another synthetic creature made of this time human tracheal epithelial cells because you might think that the thing I showed you before was a kind of a feature of specific feature of amphibian development. You know, amphibian are pretty plastic in its embryonic cells.

So, you might think that they would have plasticity to do other things. Well, these are adult human cells.

In both cases, there is no genetic editing. We haven't done anything to the genome. There are no synthetic biology circuits. There are no scaffolds. There are no weird nanomaterials.

This is This is all plasticity on the part of the cells to reimagine their multicellularity and to find new patterns in various spaces. So, as you look at this thing running around, and again, these these other cells these other dots are just other cells.

You can You can You can see that if I didn't tell you what this is, you might think that this is something we got from the bottom of a pond somewhere. It looks like some kind of primitive organism.

But if you sequence the genome, it would just be Homo sapiens. So again, you get this you get this idea that the genetics specifies hardware that is actually perfectly capable of picking up other patterns of form of behavior of transcription. Here's Here's something cool that the anthrobots can do.

If you lay them down on a on a on a field of of of neural cells and you put a big scratch through it, so here's a wound, these anthrobots will gather into something we call a superbot cluster.

So, there's maybe a dozen of them here.

They kind of gather into this pile. And what you see here is that over the next 4 days, they they start to knit the the across the gap. Here's Here's where the anthrobots were sitting when you lift them up. This is what you see. They're actually repairing the tissue. So, they have this ability to repair other other other tissue damage. Now, who would have known? Right? These these cells sit in your trachea quietly for for decades dealing with the with the mucus and and things like that. And it turns out that they can form a self-motile little creature with with the ability to repair uh um the neural neural neural tissues. Now, these guys also have a radically remodeled transcriptome. 9,000 over 9,000 new gene or or different gene expressions that they would not be having inside the body. Okay, lots of lots of fascinating different different genes that they turn on. And so, they have a they have a drastically remodeled transcriptome. They actually have four distinct behaviors, and you can draw an ethogram of how they switch between these behaviors. This is This is what the close-up of what the anthrobots look like. Um And so And so now that I've shown you these two synthetic kinds of kinds of creatures, here's the here's the most important part.

There's never been any xenobots. There's never been any anthrobots. We don't think that the anthrobots look like any early stage of human development.

Uh all of these things are kind of a an alternate path. So so here's the frog genome and so we know it can make this developmental set of stages in these tadpoles, but it turns out it can also do this. These are these are the xenobots. They do have some kind of weird developmental stage. This is a like an 84-day-old xenobot. We have no idea what it's turning into. It's some it's got some kind of a some kind of developmental sequence and and here's the behavior.

It's got different behaviors. So so in these in these two cases of xenobots and anthrobots, there is no straightforward evolutionary backstory. Um where did these goals come from? There's never been selection to be a good xenobot. There's never been selection to be a good anthrobot. And so what we see is that the hardware is picking up other kinds of patterns that we cannot say came from selection. You know, you can you can try and say that that these things were sort of learned at the same time that it learned to be a frog or a human, but that breaks the whole point of of of evolution as as being able to explain the specific features of a creature with reference to the the details of the of its past, the details of the selection forces in its environment. You know, nothing look looking at looking at the human the history of the human body not nothing there tells you about xenobots or about anthrobots, about the genes the anthrobots are going to express, about the the the neural healing that they do and and and all kinds of other things. So those things are just not derivable in any in any obvious way from the from the from the evolutionary selection forces.

So there's also an interesting computational aspect to this, which is that we know when the computation was done to make a frog. Presumably it was done in the sort of millions of years of the frog genome struggling with the environment. When was the computation done for xenobots? There's never there's never been selection to be a good xenobot or a good anthrobot. When when were those computations done? And so that's that's a whole other interesting thing to to to think about, which is in an important sense, the ability to to access these other patterns is a kind of free compute.

And this is this is a much bigger topic to be discussed, but this this notion that that there are some free lunches here and that you can if you make hardware that's versatile enough, it can pick up patterns that do not specifically need to be evolved, which is which is a a massive time saver for for evolution. So the last thing I want to say in this section is that you might think that these these kind of tricks, being able to find amazing new forms and behaviors and other things that are just not not derivable or not expected from the history or the hardware of the of the system, that that that those might require very complicated interfaces. In other words, biologicals.

You have to be a biological organism to have the benefit of these these these unexpected sophisticated new new forms of of anatomy and behavior. And so I I will only mention it briefly is that this paper and some other things we have coming out later this this year suggest that actually it really doesn't take much to benefit from this.

Uh It it doesn't take cells, life, or huge complexity to have emergent goals and have navigational competencies in various spaces that would be easily recognizable by behavioral scientists. In other words, these surprising the the the the thing the the the these these surprising outcomes are not simply complexity or unpredictability, but they're actually competencies that are that are well familiar to to to to behavioral scientists. And and what we studied in this paper is something extremely simple. It's an extremely minimal model. It's a sorting algorithm.

things like bubble sort. And what we find is for example they have they have a couple of interesting features. First First they have competencies that are not obvious from the algorithm. In other words, one one thing they have is delayed gratification. So if you put a barrier if you if you apply a barrier such that the sorting algorithm is is is having trouble moving a particular number to where it needs to go, it will actually backtrack, reduce its sortedness in order to solve the problem in a different way.

This is in the way the in the standard in the standard algorithm that we're studying here, there is no provision for this. There is absolutely no provision for what to do if you encounter a broken a broken a broken cell. Like the algorithm itself assumes that the hardware is reliable. And so it's it's it's short, it's it's deterministic, it's completely transparent. You can see all the pieces, unlike the biology. I mean there's always new mechanisms to be discovered in biology, but in the algorithm you can see everything that's there. And there is nothing there about what to do in these cases or about how to do delayed gratification. And yet that's exactly what it does. And it's it also does some other things which um which are kind of really interesting side quests that again the algorithm doesn't ask them to do, but but they're able to do it in this this thing called this thing called clustering, which they actually they actually are able to recognize uh uh cells that running different types of cells recognize other cells that are running the same algorithm as them and they tend to cluster together for as long as they can until the need for actual sorting overcomes it. And so these are these kind of side quests are again not anything the algorithm asks them to do.

So what we're seeing here is that in even extremely minimal in extremely minimal systems like like like the deterministic sorting algorithms, but certainly in complex biologicals, there are novel goals that do not seem to come from the the the typical sources that you know are are are taken to be the the kind of origin of of these kind of patterns, which is either the physics, the history, or in this case the algorithm.

Okay, so there are things that are not explained by any of those, not explained by and not predicted by, consistent with them. In other words, none of this is magic. None of these things are doing that either physics or the algorithms prohibit, but they are doing things that are that are not predictable and not um not not obvious, not not explicitly stated in in in in these these kind of sources of of information. And so and so now this is now now now now we get to having having seen all of this. Now we get to the the final kind of most speculative part of the talk where I would like to make a make a claim that where where do these novel goals come from?

I think that uh basically I'm I'm going to argue that they come from a structured space. Okay, which which avails us of a research program and I think is a much better option than the standard kind of popular thing today, which is emergence.

And so when we see uh various systems acquiring unexpected patterns, unexpected patterns of form, of behavior, and and and so on, there are a couple of ways to think about this. Option one which I think is basically the the kind of popular option nowadays is this idea that uh well there are there's there are just some things that that hold in our world.

These are these are some amazing facts.

We call them emergent because we didn't see them coming. It's you know, emergence is basically I mean in this case a measure of surprise. Some some some some subunits together did something that wasn't obvious. We're going to call it emergence and and and that's it. That's just that's just something that that that that holds in our world. And the benefits of that view is that it gives you a sparse ontology. In other words, you can stick with the physical world. You don't need to think about a non-physical platonic space.

But I think this is really a pessimistic or mysterian view. It suggests that these things are kind of random. They crop up when they crop up and the best you can do is is note them and and and move on and and and wait till you find the next one. I think there's a there's a better option, which is which is basically what the platonist mathematicians assume. Which is that these things are not a random grab bag of strange curious facts that hold in our world, but it is but but but actually there's an ordered latent space of patterns, which can be studied systematically.

That these things are arranged in some sort of rational rational way that allows us to to study them. And that allows us to have a research agenda, which I'll I'll talk about more in a minute.

But basically what it does what what this view does is cast synthetic morphology beings such as anthrobots, xenobots, chimeras, and so and and and computers and and and robotics and so on. All of these things are basically vehicles for exploring this platonic latent space of of patterns. If we assume that that the forms that I've that I've been showing you that serve as the target of of behavior at different scales are not random kind of surprises, but are actually part of an ordered structured latent space, then we can we can use these these kind of constructs to actually explore explore the space, to watch what what kinds of patterns are are are manifested by by these things and and and work out the work out the relationship. Now this is of course not a new idea. This has been around forever and so so Pythagoras and Plato and and and modern philosophers like Popper and and others had this idea that there is in fact a a non-physical space of patterns of different kinds and that these things are in some way functionally important for what happens in the physical world. Now I I only show this to point out that that that this this rough idea has been present before. I'm not trying to actually stick stick close to to to any of these specific specific proposals, except to say that there are many many mathematicians that believe that there is in fact a space that what they're doing is mapping out this space, that they are systematically discovering, not inventing, but discovering the kinds of objects that that live in that space, and they can sort of move from one to the other by by learning about each one, and and that and that sort of helps them navigate the navigate that space.

And that's that's the conventional view is that this this platonic space basically contains properties of mathematical objects, true truths of of different different branches of of of mathematics.

But one thing we can do is we can ask what else might be in that space. In the In other words, if there are perhaps, let's let's assume for now that what mathematics kind of is is the it it's a kind of behavioral science applied to one specific layer or one specific region of this platonic space. In other words, it's the science of the behavior of kind of low agency forms that are amenable to certain classes of precise formal models and so on, then one one might ask, well, what else might be in that space in addition to to those things? Might there be much more complex and and active forms that we would recognize as behavioral propensities, aka kinds of minds. So, the proposal here is that yes, there's a there's a non-physical platonic space that contains various mathematical facts that inform things like particle physics and and and and biological structures and so on.

But also, there are more complex patterns that inform not just not just anatomical outcomes, but behavioral outcomes as well. And so, if we think about it that way, if we think about that these forms constrain constrain aspects of physics, right?

Mathematical facts constrain aspects of physics, and they are exploited by biology, then perhaps this this famous question by Hawking, you know, what what breathes fire into the equations, maybe it's backwards.

Maybe it's the idea that it's actually the mathematical properties that are breathing fire into the physical world.

In this case, again, I've been alluding this all throughout the talk that that that parts of or perhaps all of the physical world are set of interfaces or front ends or thin clients to the the main show, which are which are the patterns that that come through and that and that drive what happens. And there there are two things I want to lean on. One one is this idea of explanations, right? So, cicadas come out every 13 and 17 years. And if you're a biologist and you would like to understand why this is happening, eventually you get to the to the idea that right, it's because they're prime number years, and that allows them to to be off of cycles with their predators.

And then you say, okay, but why 13 and 17?

Like why are those special? And now you've left the province of of biology and physics, you are now in the math department. If you want to understand why 13 and 17 are the way they are, then you need to talk to mathematicians and understand the distribution of primes.

So, and and as far as I can tell, this happens in in biology both in biology and physics. If you keep pushing the question, yeah, but why why this? Why why specifically this?

The further back you push that that that line of inquiry, eventually you always end up in math. You always end end up in in facts about mathematical structures.

So, so explanations tend to take you out of physics and out of biology and into math. And then and then there's this idea of the of the causality, and it's difficult to talk about traditional causality because I don't know how to do time in this case.

But if but but instead, if we think about interventions. So, if if if if somehow the distribution of primes were different, and it wasn't 13 and 17 that were prime, but something else, then that is what the cicadas would be doing. In other words, the behavior of the biology is driven by the properties of mathematics, not the other way around. As far as I can tell, there's nothing you can do in the physical world to have a different value for Feigenbaum's constant or E or or or any of these you know, these facts of number theory or or topology, whatever this there's pretty much nothing nothing you can do in physics to change any of that.

But the reverse is not true. These things are actually driving aspects of of biology and I think of physics, although I won't get into that. I'll let the physicists talk about it.

But but but the other interesting thing with biology is that it doesn't it doesn't it isn't merely constrained by these facts, it actually exploits them.

And what I mean by exploit is the amount of what I mean by by free lunches of is the amount of effort involved. So, if you're evolution and you're trying to evolve a very particular kind of triangle, you spend a bunch of generations getting the first angle right, you spend a bunch of generations getting the second angle right, but you don't need to do any effort to get the third angle. You already know what it is by this this this free gift from the laws of geometry. I That saves you as evolution it saves you a bunch of time. Or, if you discover a voltage-gated ion channel, such as a KV channel, what you really have is a transistor, a voltage-gated current conductance. If you have a couple of those transistors, you can make a logic gate. The properties of the logic gates with the truth table and the fact that NAND is special and all that all that fun stuff, you don't have to evolve those. You don't have to spend time evolving, you get it for free from the properties of the logic gate that you made. And these are these are just just two examples.

There's tons. And actually, Andreas Wagner has has a really interesting book about this, about where where the where the the successful patterns actually come from in in in evolution. And so, so so what I'm what I'm what I'm what I'm arguing for is that this this idea that that a lot of what we see and a lot of the science of of of of engineering, of biology, of computation are really sciences of the front ends of these things. They're They're the sciences of the interface. And if if you can depend on the resource that's behind that interface, you can start to you can you can you can start to really exploit it, you know, kind of kind of like a parasite that loses a bunch of functions once they they let the host they they depend on the host to to to do all the things that they need to do.

They start to they start to become you know, more sparse and and lose lose things. This is this is seen in biology as well. I mean, this is this is and you can you can see these cases reviewed in in in this paper, you know, this this idea of even the brain as a thin client.

There are rare humans with extreme lack of of brain matter and yet normal or even above normal IQ. Now, obviously, mostly that's not what we see, right?

These these are exceptions.

Nevertheless, they exist. There are there are amazing clinical cases that you can see here where where the brain tissue is is basically not at all what what neuroscience would predict is necessary for the kind of functioning that that they do. So, so so this this this this idea of how how many of these things are actually well described as as a kind of front end interface to some patterns, either static patterns or computations, in other words, active patterns done in this in this space. Now, at this point, you might be thinking that wait, we've heard this before. This is what Descartes was was sort of saying that there's this there's this there's this non-physical world, and there are there are minds in this non-physical world that interact with with brains and are responsible for for behavior. And generally, people think that this is dead. This this view is has been has been put to bed because there's this there's this basic kind of kind of question that was was posed to Descartes by the Princess of Bohemia, I believe, and she said, look, if the if these mental states are not physical, how could it possibly have causal influence over the physical world? Okay, how would you know, it's not going to work if these things aren't aren't physical. We have conservation of of mass energy. You're not going to be able to push around the chemistry by any any any non-physical kinds of kinds of things.

And I I you know, I want I want to say two two things about this. First of all, I'm I'm kind of surprised that Descartes, being a mathematician, didn't say this. And as far as as far as I could see, he he has not actually said this. He as as a reply to this, we already had a a problem with interactionism. In other words, non-physical objects determining aspects of physics. We already had this from the time of Pythagoras. We know we we've already known that there are mathematical features that constrain and um um and kind of uh enhance things that things that happen in this in this in this physical world.

In In that In that sense, physicalism was already dead even in Newton's boring kind of classical universe. We didn't need quantum mechanics because because that universe is already in this in an important way haunted by the laws of mathematics. In the way that I explained, if you start asking why, you will eventually end up in in the the realm of facts about mathematical objects and mathematical structures, not not physical ones. So, we already we already knew that this was the case.

And uh what if the mind-body relationship is basically the same as the math-physics relationship? In other words, in order to understand how how how minds supervene on on bodies, we can maybe take take our cue from and and and granted is I I think there's a lot we don't understand here, but I do think the shape of the problem is is is roughly the same. In In the relationship between math and physics, you already have a situation where non-physical states of affairs are determining things that happen in the physical world. And I and I don't think we need to look for a for a quantum interface or or any kind of exotic physics. I I think I think this is this is really fundamental what's what's what's going on, and that basically, you know, when when when we're seeing low agency forms from that space do low agency things in the physical world, we call it mathematics and physics. And when we see high high high complexity, high agency patterns doing it through a biological interface, we call this minds and bodies. But otherwise, it's basically the exact same spectrum. And so this suggests that well we know because of the interoperability of biology pretty much any combination of evolved material, engineered material, and software is some kind of a viable being. In other words, we are we already have cyborgs and hybrids and various chimeras. You know, every possible combination of life and engineering is is a viable embodied mind. Um you know, this is this is a massive space of of of possible embodied minds. All of the natural ones um that Darwin was thinking about when he said the endless forms most beautiful are like a a tiny corner of this this this option space. And all of these are going to be the beneficiaries of these kinds of ingressions from that platonic space. In other words, they are going to have new patterns because they are new interfaces. And this means that if we continue to make these new interfaces, everything from from various kinds of cyborgs and and biobots and bioengineered objects and swarms of swarm robotics and internet of things, all these different things we are going to end up pulling down behavioral propensities, meaning kinds of minds, from platonic space that we have never seen before. Um perhaps ones that have never been embodied before anywhere on this planet, maybe nowhere in the universe. Um We we we are we are well underway to making all kinds of new interfaces for new kinds of new kinds of minds. And we have to we have to be be alert to that because we are not good at predicting them whatsoever. So I think the project of recognizing what you're going to get and being able to communicate with it and ethically relate to it is going to be of prime importance to us as we get a lot of surprises. You know, emergence is doesn't even begin to doesn't even begin to cover what I think is going on here.

When we make novel interfaces without a good ability to actually detect what kind of um what kind of behavioral competencies are are coming through. And so at this point this is this is this is kind of a really controversial kind of controversial idea is that we many people are pretty comfortable with the idea that the laws of biochemistry don't tell you everything you need to know about the mind.

That there's something you know, something more going on here whether whether you know, um on a conventional kind of model or not.

It's it's we we are we are pretty used to giving ourselves a kind of a special special status that that that the the facts about the low level components don't don't tell the whole story. But most people think that with machines that is the case. In other words, when you see an algorithm, you know everything that machine is capable of. And I'm going to claim that because I think most of what we study both in biology and in physics and computer science are basically interfaces to patterns. These these are sciences of the front end, not of the whole system.

And and because there are these these massive surprises that that we're constantly getting, I think that perhaps nothing is only what the material say it is, not even not not even simple machines. There may not be anything in this world that is truly matches this idea of a machine that is fully described by our formal models. And we and and this this this I I think should not be controversial, this idea that that our formal models are just that. They're formal models, they don't necessarily capture what anything is doing, certainly not the biology. You know, I I I don't think Turing machines and algorithms are useful formal models for biology. But but but I don't think they're useful they're they're I don't think they they they exhaustively tell the story of even what we call simple machines. And so as Magritte was telling us that this is not a pipe, this is a representation of a pipe, this is this this is this is not a Turing machine. It it We have a formal model of a Turing machine that allows us to to explain, predict, and exploit some features of this. But if even bubble sort is doing things that in in you know, six plus decades of of working with these things nobody had noticed that it's actually has these these novel competencies, then I think it's entirely possible that many of the complex things that we build, for example, language models and and and such are are going to be interfaces for all kinds of surprising ingressions that are not just complexity, not just unpredictability, and certainly not just the thing we're asking them to do, meaning the algorithm, you know, the the language use and so on. I suspect that they're going to be pulling down all kinds of interesting patterns that we're just not smart enough to to check for yet. And so my claim is that my neither neither neither minds nor machines are fully defined by our models of them. Neither of their limitations nor nor of their competencies. So Okay, I'll I'll I'll I'll wrap up here just by summarizing a couple of things that what I claimed today. First of all, that patterns, whether they be of anatomy or of behavior or of gene expression or anything else, are ubiquitous in the world. They are specifically goals for various kinds of agents' problem-solving competencies.

They're not just things that happen.

They are specific um specific end points for different degrees of intelligence that that tries to find them in these spaces. So they're targets for navigation, they're attractors in these spaces. That genetics and emergence are insufficient.

Emergence by itself, I think is is too mysterious and limiting. We need we need to do we need to do better than this.

And because we now know that there are novel novel forms that cannot be blamed on on a on on a history of selection, we need new models for understanding where these things come from.

So those are the things that that I tried to try to illustrate. And so so here are my some some hypotheses for the future.

I think that patterns exist which are not determined by history or by facts of physics. And these patterns are like facts about mathematical objects, they come from the same space. I think that physical objects, be they simple machines, cells, organisms, cyborgs, and so on are basically pointers into a space of these patterns. They're interfaces through which non-physical influences ingress into the physical world. I think evolution exploits these free lunches massively. And and so can we. We can we as bioengineers can exploit them too if we had a better understanding of the mapping between the interface and the patterns you get. So this is not just a philosophical speculation.

It matters for very practical reasons of progress in regenerative medicine, progress in bioengineering, and so on.

I suspect that by terminology, it's just that physics is what we tend to call things that are constrained by these patterns, sort of low agency things. And biology is what we tend to call things that are enabled or facilitated by and actively exploit these patterns. I think I think the magic that we're seeing here is is not quantum, although it's entirely possible that that uh quantum biology adds important bells and whistles, I don't know. But I think but I think the most important magic here, which is that this this idea that that you get more than you put in, that the mechanism does not tell the whole story, that what we're looking at is an interface that actually allows us to access something something much greater than that is obvious, already existed in the deterministic classical world because the truths of mathematics were already constraining things that could happen in in Newton's world.

And so so I I think that in a you know, in a in a kind of a turn of phrase here that embryos are are haunted by by specific morphogenetic patterns from that space from the space of anatomical attractors in the same way as triangular objects are haunted by facts of geometry. And and and and the particles in physics are are haunted by various symmetries of of other mathematical objects and so on. I suspect that the mind-brain relation is the same as the math-physics relation.

I think we basically are patterns in the platonic space along with other things that live in that space.

We can think about mathematics as the behavior of certain kinds of objects in that space. And that kind of idea recasts the the general um kind of pyramid of the sciences with behavior science on the at the bottom.

Behavior science as as the foundation and everything else you know, be basically just being regions regions of that are types of behavior science. I think that we can we can you know, once we go down this road, it's not only about bioengineering and and and evolution and regenerative medicine. We can also say some things that might be relevant for for for philosophy and things like that.

For example, you might you might say that things we call reasons, so systems that do things because of reasons, are when your interface is largely controlled by high level patterns. On the other hand, you're a system that's dominated by causes when it's controlled by relatively low level patterns. In other words, the difference between reasons and reasons and causes is a is is continuous. It's they're on the same spectrum. It's just what kind of what kind of patterns are are are driving the the behavior.

And then and then we can also say something about things like free will, which you could you could define stepping away from from issues of determinism or and and so on. You could you could define it as the degree to which whatever you're embodied in, right? So your current interface, which which is the interface, is determined by genetics, physics, and your past history of actions. Whatever you interface you have, to to whatever degree that interface enables the the sort of most most complex, most high-order forms to come through, uncontaminated by others forms or or you know, low your own low-level forms. To whatever extent that that can come through, that that might be an interesting measure of what we what we to colloquially call free will.

And so, I think I think thinking about things in this way suggests a very tractable, a very kind of empirically practical research program.

We can we can build new interfaces to observe new ingressing forms, and the synthetic morphology work of our group and many other groups provide some some amazing vehicles for exploration of that space.

I think we need to start to infer a model of the mapping between the properties of the pointers and the patterns they facilitate.

We need to quantify the the free lunch aspects. So, how how much information and influence and evolvability is really injected into the physical world?

To what extent do to what numerical extent do we get more than we than than we put in when we make various interfaces? And and is it just static patterns or could we actually get free compute? Is there dynamic computation that we can get in this in this way?

I think it's interesting to think about the contents of that space as under positive pressure, meaning that um it doesn't take much to pull them into this world. If you make an interface, they show up. In other words, they are they are to some extent pressurized to to to ingress through.

We don't know if the space is sparse, if some attractors are better than than others, if you know, or or if it's if the space is dense. Basically, it's it's structure. We we we really don't know.

Um one thing that I suspected but but don't have any evidence for yet is that the contents of the space is not purely passive. These are not eternal unchanging forms, the way that some people have cast them, but actually dynamic, and that maybe we can actually define a kind of chemistry of what's happening to these forms. Can they interact with each other distinct from their interaction via the interfaces of the physical world?

And and and is is it really true? I've said several times that maybe mathematical objects are the low agency ones in that space, and then you have these these minds and so on.

I'm actually not sure of that at all.

Like with everything else, we have to do experiments. And we have some ideas on extending standard behaviorist tests into the native space of mathematical objects to see if whether we've we've really misunderstood them all along and you know, have not have not recognized what what they're capable of. And so, stay tuned for that. We have some we have some papers coming on this in the next in the next few months.

And then there are of course the really big questions, which I'm not even going to I'm not even going to try attempt to cover, which is, you know, once once you have this this this model, then of course you can ask questions about okay, but what sets the structure of the Platonic space itself? Where did it come from? Could it have been otherwise? All these all these questions, I have I have no idea how to how to answer that.

But I think I think this this this stuff will keep us plenty busy. So, I'm I'll stop here, and I just want to thank the people who did the biology and the computation that that I showed you today. So, so all kinds of amazing students and and postdocs and our collaborators and our various funders that have that have supported supported this work all along.

I I want to be clear that I am not claiming that the people that I'm listing here endorse this non-physicalist model. I realize that it's it's very unpopular in the sense that it goes against some some very strong assumptions and and and kind of traditions in in in both computer science and and biology and cognitive science and so on.

But but anyway, it's there there it is for for discussion. And disclosure, there are there are three companies that have have funded various work that I've described today. So, and then of course, always thank the the actual model systems that that do all the heavy lifting and teaching us about what's actually possible to do with a with a physical interface. So, yeah, thank you. That's it, and I'll stop here.