Título: "Radical Platonism and Radical Empiricism" by Joel Dietz
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPUhmQrmqRg
Duración: 54.7 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

pleasure to be here. Um so I'm going to just cover a little bit starting you know with the morphospace from a historical perspective and then various ways that people have used to um you know look at how it can evolve uh particularly relating to the things that happened sort of in the first lecture and uh most specifically how we can possibly formalize the language of form itself. Um I'm also affiliated with uh with SEM. Um and just a general outline we're going to cover. So go over the research program from the last presentation again. Talk about some of the key philosophical questions that are embedded in it. The kind of etmology and evolution morphospace concept of empiricism specifically related to that.

Um specifically what 11 lab has done obviously most people be quite familiar with that here on this so I won't go that much. But then thinking about basian thinking knowledge graphs how they intersect how they're currently used in science. um a little bit about probabilistic knowledge graphs and then beauty and form which I think we'll find out is actually not much of a is not really a side topic um and then kind of where we go from here. I'll go through a lot of things quickly but we'll have time for questions at the end. So uh just to recap some of the research program as it was already put out um you know we're talking here really about the the first second and last um things here a little bit both what are the new interface faces that could be made that would observe these ingressing forms um and the the concept of this sort of synthetic morphology work obviously we don't have full access to um what professor Leven has been putting out most recently so we're waiting I guess in a way those of us who are a little bit on the outside. Um, and then this rigorous mapping between properties of pointers and the patterns they facilitate very kind of important and then particularly you know what it what can we really say realistically about this platonic space. I'm not going to assume necessarily the outset that it exists but we we'll we'll sort of um go through that um and methodologically. So this is you know my background um is a little bit formal philosophy training also religious studies and you know particularly when people and then a little bit um applied computer science more on actually building things backend of database design as it pertains to other things. So the most recent work I've been doing is actually specifically for people involved in both psychedelic and spiritual studies and um I helped set up the contemplative studies initiative particularly backend stuff um at Brown University um quite a while ago. What in all these claims that is made is actually empirically verified um and and how is empirically verified. So um you know with something like meditation you can often say you have random controls trial people have anxiety reduction etc. um that's usually sufficient for you know getting past insurance things in the US and that's one thing that people look at uh but obviously there's a lot other and this is more the the sort of pure biology version um which is frankly not my expertise um but hopefully I will lean a little bit on my expertise as we go through this so what do we know um just in general with a strong sense um this is where the basian stuff comes important um how can we extend this knowledge um and then if we find edge case for example um as Michael Leven suggested that there's ingress or phenomena is not covered in one of these formal systems. How can we involve the system without introducing fuzzy logic?

Use that in a sort of vague general sense, but it is one of the problems that's usually attributed to the classic platonisms um that basically they they oversp specify things that we don't have clear evidence for. Um and I think more or less this has been a critique going all the way back to Aristotle. So um and there's many many different versions of it. And then more specifically related to SEM, we have an interest I think in creating seminar series to educate people more broadly and uh and interact with a lot of people who are interested in these things. So how can we actually take this very specifically introduce the knowledge to other people who might be able to do something with it whether they're mid-career professionals or you know math uh PhD students or what have you and that's sort of already what's happening under that umbrella. Um so going to the morphospace and how this kind of concept got established. Uh you know my last book for MIT press was really on history of technology but it it went into pretty heavy philosophical um uh topics because people are motivated by these things. So I think it's interesting sometimes to talk about the psychology and motivation um but Darcy Thompson who was covered last time um really interesting mathematician who went into a lot of different things about math and where it intersects sort of other fields and particularly biology. Um, and he was doing this really all by hand, interestingly enough, in these little diagrams of how the kind of morphology of these things, but he very specifically said he was indebted to three people, Galileo, Albertur, and Gerta. Now, Gerta um really originated this stuff in 1786 when he was traveling around in the Alps and he noted variations between different what seemed to be the same species at different altitudes. and he started noting this and then he um you know developed this concept a little bit um and was quite disappointed not to be taken seriously as a scientist more or less in his lifetime and afterwards um and so he's primarily known as artist but he did have this concept basically that there is this original morphology and that is the term basically when Darcy Thompson takes it is is specifically from uh Gerta so um and then we go into right and kind of looking at the uh selective evolution um uh later on with the kind of respect to another form of the sort of morphospace um and um genome and kind of morphagens.

Um then in touring you have the chemical basis of morphagenesis. So this is specifically the mor morphagens as it pertains to something like stripes or how they might evolve. He was able to model this guy was able to duplicate some of his code here. So you see like literally this is um you know one of these things evolving basically um with respect to certain morphagens. Um and then Ralph who we'll sort of cover in more depth. Um it's pretty important thing actually here if you just see what is in the black. Obviously Lean uses this in some of his as well. But these these on the outside are computer models. So he is really the earliest person to kind of go out and look in the paleontological literature on shells and basically model here's all the shell shapes that could exist. And then inside the cube is more or less in this black area where we actually find them. So obviously not every computer modeled cube even according to the core variables he used was actually found. Um nonetheless he was able to model with some degree of pretty reliability and successful but this stuff and you know this is really kind of more faux space.

Uh we can really go to Ralph's work and you see his early work you get something that is very geometric um you know very specific um things here circles etc. and then the model that's built from it again completely done by the computer method in the beginning. So this is in some ways pre-empiricism and that's interesting because in Darcy Thompson we also don't have a very clear empirical method and even early route we don't but then by ' 67 this is really solid um from from my perspective um viewing it you have the computer model here on the left the variables associated with the computer model and then here in the middle you have um basically where these things were actually found. So this is you know in in here this is the space where we found within these particular variable constraints um things that exist and then um even further here on the right you have concentrated specific things like highly oriented forms and this you has legacy historical value for you know things too that is in museums and I was able to model this as well pretty pretty easily. So you know kind of a pretty clear method um and it's been applied other places. So, um I'm going to get back a little bit at the end to sort of where it's implied, where it hasn't applied, and why. But, um squamata, for those who don't know, is a general term that encompasses uh lizards and snakes and other things like that as particular form in evolutionary history.

I think this is 240 million years ago.

I'm not an expert per se, but you can see we can basically look at the evolution of these things in a in a time series, which is quite helpful, which forms exist and basically use a kind of morph space to kind of plot that as well as which ones didn't succeed from a sort of evolutionary fitness standpoint. Um, you know, the and and this second one here, we have the dental version of this. Uh, we also have the cranial version of this. Um so there's a lot of things we can in theory basically plot in a sort of geometric um analysis with respect to what we think should exist, what actually did exist and then kind of um so forth. So um quite interesting.

Now the 11 version particularly here um this is my very crude version here in the middle. So this doesn't come from this comes from me. Um but nonetheless uh you're still having this formula of basically how all of these different um plenarians kind of can can evolve under what circumstances with what um auxiliary morphagens and drugs and what sort of shapes come out of it. Um uh and I'm going to zip through this. This is partially done for for the SEM people.

But you know one of the interesting things from from my standpoint looking in from the outside is you know not only this sort of ion channel mapping um and then this which is in a 2021 paper about how only a few of the you know estimated 400 sort of uh let's see ion channel genes have actually been targeted. So there's still a whole lot of space of effectively research to be done. So in theory, when you're looking at a field like this, you would want to see what hasn't been done yet and where the opportunity space is, you know, as well as what has actually been established.

Obviously, this is this is more or less being stated here explicitly. Um, and then probably things that everyone has seen before, you know, morphogenesis and the Picasso tadpole. Um, you know, the actual anatomical homoasis, bioelectrical memory, how this sort of thing evolves. Um, the xenobots. and a xenobots are pretty interesting because again we have um a list of and this is these pixel models that for different forms of effectively the muscle tissue of the cell so to speak versus whatever else that is there that will then cause it to evolve in a particular way and things like that. So we can more or less specify a formal model. We can effectively program um these things and then see how they exist and then the variance and that's um something that to a degree exists already now in this xenobot literature but I'm sure it will evolve um considerably. Anthrobots as well um I'm not going to cover things that are covered elsewhere on the internet per se. Um but then getting in the anatomical compiler. Now this is really interesting um not only because it is a specific set of software with a bunch of experiments and morphologies that have been documented things like that behind it. Um but also because it has you know so many implications of what we can do if we are able to effectively know which um you know targeting uh drugs or related signal to to inject to cause certain um outcomes in a fairly well doumented way. So this is really really interesting from this point. Now to kind of map it at a high level basing thinking not something the most basic version of it does not really require you knowing very much other than you have a hypothesis you look at new evidence and then you test it against it and then you reformulate your hypothesis on the basis of evidence. So it's evolving is sort of probabilistic by its nature because you never have absolute confidence in something you have a relative confidence. Uh this is a classic model of whether or not well Tom is shy is he a math PhD or in business school while in math 75% of the people are shy or is a business only 15% but there's a lot more people in business school in math and then overall it actually ends up you know twothirds probability that he's in business school. So um watch the video if you want to go in more depth but knowledge graphs um also are starting to be used in science also used other places and they basically have this format. This is a more complicated one. Um but you know it's a formal semantics effectively and there's reasons why people are starting to use it in science and partially is because they're machine parsible. Um they can be fed into u machine learning uh models and be used for probabilistic reasoning and sort of discovery which we'll get into a little bit. Um and there are cases where just you know formal semantics make sense. One of the interesting things here is that you know you can have an LM discovery mechanism that then comes in scrapes data and then basically formats it in this way which is more or less what I've done as part of this um presentation which we'll see shortly um after we go through a few more examples but um you know this also as you can see here does allow a little bit of a nesting function where you can see kind of a a whole field what's been done where where the interactions are and the rest of it. So this is sort of you know for drug repurposing specifically. Uh there's a lot of um databases and things like that that are effectively aggregating uh this sort of information and how you know these different systems um exist uh and relate to each other. Uh then um within sort of knowledge graphs and machine learning specifically now we get um kind of path count here. Well let's start here actually sorry. Um, so we we're going to kind of go through with the potential, you know, biological relationships from the R exists more or less in the same format that we just saw, kind of these these interrelated knowledge graphs. And then once you have the data sets that are connected basically that all have these things and then we're going to do what you know the sort of standard random walk um embeddings and then in theory you get these sort of distances and you can see um potentially uh novel relationships. So that's kind of what is going to be thought out for. We'll see again another version of that for drug discovery specifically. Um but this is fairly standard. I mean you also get this other adjacent fields. There's actually quite a number of them. Um but because there's a little biomedical leaning this uh presentation but this is a cyber security knowledge graph.

Similar principles basically apply there um for uh you know seeing what sort of things and then being able to learn basically on the bas basis of of them.

So this is a knowledge graph. Um one of the people who sort of I talked to in the last couple weeks related to this is Tobias Um who has been looking very specifically about knowledge graphs um with a kind of immutable record um scoping so that you can get sort of larger scale um understanding of science as a whole and how it can be accelerated um including some of the principles and sort of data stuff. So um this is his project basically nano publications um but it has been getting some adoption and you get you know one of the benefits as well with the sort of encryption technique is that you can um kind of drill down you get this natural sort of nesting function and then in in addition to potentially a peer-reviewed you know scientific study you get a specific um uh knowledge graph assertion of what was the finding so that you know is helpful sometimes rather than what I sitting here which is you know a stack this tall of you know 11 lab papers which is you know sometimes not that human parsible frankly to go through all of them and read them and retain them uh and the rest of it. So um the with relative to drug discovery specifically we have um you know this is pretty recent frankly it's the last year or two where you're starting to get more stuff maybe there's only like 40 or 50 people in the world that are actually working these probabilistic knowledge graphs right now from what I could tell or at least have published on it so far. uh but it has this really interesting additional feature where you starting to assess the weight of evidence for a particular assertion um and and in a probability way which then basically if you're having these typical relations between a disease and a drug target etc. then we're getting the kind of probability of an association between these different ones um and then this can potentially uh set in sort of this um you know figure out the new target and and the rest of it. So it's kind of kind of recent. But one reason why you might want to do this, this is probably the only thing I'll say about economics, but it is a kind of important um feature of the overall system as you know people who are researching on these things have to get paid as well or that certain types of experiments are are costly. Um and this is the you know cost to research and develop new drugs according to pharma economics um in millions of dollars. So you know the top line we're talking about three billion range of research for certain types of things.

bottom line we're talking 100 200 million. So this cap um cap X so to speak is quite high uh for getting started in uh in some of these things and so anything can be done to kind of reduce or or or understand the space better um likely to cause a huge huge cost savings overall. Now specific to um radical platonism we're going to kind of roll up to it. This is very standard kind of basian weight of knowledge thing which will be even more clear in the next slide once we actually look at a specific example but you know we're looking at the probability of something based on the evidence for it more or less um with any sort of counter evidence. Um and we've done a sort of breaking this out kind of parsing and then all the sort of clear 11 lab hypothesis um that have existed. So we have you know the stuff that was sort of um kind of a posterior one which is more or less it's confidence as a percentage. So 70 97% 9 plus percent 90 88% and this is sort of going through um each more or less thing based on evidence and and have these all broken out so don't necessarily need to read them through at this moment. Um but you can see that there's a range basically mostly highly validated but according at least to this sort of you know LM evaluation on the basis of existing thing some like you know cancer as a bielectric network disorder only at 78%. So it's you know we're expressing it more or less in a strict um quantified way that can be adjusted rather than a strict binary format um which is I think one of the the issues in some types of reasoning approaches anyways. So um yeah I think we'll find that very useful once we get to radical platonism specifically. So the you know going through this is what it looks like in practice. This is in latex format. I have all this stuff as well available but um endogenous biomectric patterns to encode instructive target morphology. Um and then you know the supporting lines are in green um including the weight of evidence challenges uh you know what might be um sort of uh offsetting that in red. So, and then it also kind of gives you a little bit of nomenclature.

Um, whether or not this would be directly useful, I'm not 100% sure, but um, you know, within the for nano pub thing, we could uh, we can kind of automate it and it can also be revisited and things like that. So, um, it doesn't force us to have an ultimate final version. But again, here transient gap junction blockade reate sematic pattern memory. These are two-headed plenarians.

um and then you know very specifically um kind of what um the things are for and then how how relatable is it etc. So we're very very high confidence for this um probably no surprise um regulative goal directed error correction to reach more morphology.

These are the sort of things that are kind of going to lead into the radical platonism. Obviously I'm I'm approaching this a little bit from a historical lens of sort of how we got to the specific um claims. Um so this is again just a sort of general evaluation. Obviously this is become more confident the more evidence comes in. Um computing gene regulatory networks with downstream anatomical outcomes. Um bio electricity contributes to encogenesis. This is the one we said before. cancer not as clear yet but uh obviously something that people have a strong interest in during cancer and the rest of it um anatomical outcomes as attractors in the morphospace. So this is still pretty important and related as we lead in um bioelectric gradients um gap junction junction connectivity um again sort of 80 something% um and then the sort of xenobots again we sort of have that pretty well documented. Now let's go to radical platonism and see kind of how this relates uh kind of conceptually. So we have a couple different ways of sort of modeling this still kind of within the knowledge graph format but um first is sort of a you know nested sort of hypotheses that kind of roll up um more or less stating stating this kind of concept um and then assessing evidence for kind of each thing. Um so in a way you can almost see this is like a new version of a syllogism. It might even lend itself to kind of new probabilistic sort of formal logic that is being used and and particularly it seems like LM like to use this. So it could be kind of irrelevant to in in a way how much the rest of the world starts using this or caring about it. Um if LM start using it and starts to have very clear and positive sort of out outcomes um for humanity since you maybe they're sort of naturally suited towards this type of reasoning versus a single binary. Now this is again the same more or less writing of the light form of the sort of radical platonism hypothesis or or what have you um claim. Um and then there's sort of another one that's a more strong version of it. We'll see kind of where we where we come up with. But um this is the endogenous um bioelectric patterns encoding instructive target morphology.

Um and then so this is kind of in the view again this is really the LM views not necessarily my view but um and for the most part this is a five pro doing these sort of assessments although I've run it across a bunch of different systems and have the kind of comparative data but um yeah these this is uh I think the kind of pretty well validated according to available evidence and then this is the strong form some sort of biological collective can access or in have an ingress from a structured um platonic space of patterns that constrains morphagen genesis behavior behind beyond genes and environment. So this is where you know we have the and I think we you know have an agency kind of issue here obviously um that is not fully captured in this semantics um whether it's a sort of birectional kind of agency uh which you know was sort of implied by the ingress or or not but nonetheless um had like a 23% sort of confidence on the uh current um available evidence. But I'm going to argue this is kind of a good thing in a way because um because what this model allows is actually people to assess um the evidence for a specific claim uh however it's structured um with the available evidence. And since we don't necessarily have all the um things as sort of not being directly close to the labs and sort of waiting for the peerreview public um papers to get published um adding on obviously will allow this and um I think is also a nice offset to some of the things I'm going to deal with in a second the psychology of um decision-m because you know at various points people snap to pretty strong decisions about things um and basian thinking even though it is extremely rigorous and and and preferred in certain fields um also has not penetrated other fields at all. Um, which I'm going to jump a little bit to kind of a side topic that is I think very related and this um it goes back to one of the other people that Darcy Thompson got things from Albert Dur who wrote these four books on human proportion in 1528. Um, and he he was actually um for the most part non-normative about the nature of it. He was uh just documenting what actually existed humans in all sorts of forms and shapes um and sizes. But um from a very systematic uh standpoint um and he did it um quite comprehensively and then um we got Schmidt Huber on the other hand who um was one of the people who gave me some nice feedback on this uh presentation so far and uh and he's kind of making a stronger claim that I'm going to go into a little bit but more or less that uh this what we see as beauty may be complexity in some form and particularly that you know for those who are not familiar the concept that you have a short program. Effectively, we're living in a computational universe and there's some sort of computation code that is generative generating some part of our either cognition, our physomy, whatever it is. Um, that sort of shorter programs may be somehow recognizable and then correlated with what we see as beauty. So, I I don't think that's necessarily something we're going to be able to resolve in any um fashion, but I think it does relate to some key things that are here. um and particularly Darcy Thompson himself kind of coming a little bit full circle from where I started but um and this is a long quote but I think it's worth actually sometimes um absorbing these things the he says and one of the reasons basically that in the morphology of living things the use of mathematical methods and symbols has made slow progress and there are various reasons for this failure to employ a method whose advantages are so obvious in the investigation of other physical forms to begin with there would seem to be a psychological reason lying in fact that the student of living things is by nature and training an observer of concrete objects and phenomena and the habit of mind which he possesses and cultivates as alien to that of the theoretical mathematician. But by no means is this the only reason in the kindred subject of minology for instance crystals were still treated in the days of Lenus as wholly within the province of the naturalist and were described by him after the simple methods and use for animals and plants. that after Howie showed the application of mathematics to the description and classifications of crystals, his methods were immediately adopted and a new science came into being.

So he's kind of saying that basically there's a psychological reason that's sort of ingrained in human identity to a degree. And we'll go into another thing that basically um that the when we see something that deviates from a sort of mathematical form that is the identity of the thing and that is what sort of gives us its value and and to some degree that maps over onto our own appraisal of ourselves and then we have a little bit of a problem. And so when we can take to something that's inanimate, it's much easier because it's a crystal or whatever. But the thing that's animate actually becomes more and more challenging to sort of navigate this sort of default psychological presupposition. Now he that said he sort of suggests alternative methodology and that's part of the reason I'm giving this um uh quote and some length. So he said that a part of this mathematical methods and the suspicion of mathematical methods and organic morph morphology is due to an ingrained and deeply seated belief that even when we seem to discern a regular mathematical figure in an organism, the sphere, the hexagon or the spiral which we so recognize merely resembles but is never entirely explained by its mathematical analog. ensure that the details which a figure differs from its mathematical prototype are more important and more interesting than the features in which it agrees. Even that the peculiar aesthetic pleasure with which we regard a living thing is somehow bound up with a departure from mathematical regularity which it manifests as a particular or peculiar attribute of life. This view seems to me an misapprehension.

obviously he's disagreeing with this and then he's going to go and say he's I'm going to illustrate this by the case of the earth itself after the fundamental advance had been made which taught us the world was round Newton showed that the forces at work upon it must lead to it being imperfectly spherical and in the course of time its oblate spheroidal shape was actually verified but now in turn has been shown that form is still more complicated and the next step will be to seek for the forces that have deformed the oblate spheroid So more or less his claim and he's a mathematician um first and foremost is that we look first actually at the uh the shapes um well first of all we have to be aware that the psychological bias exists um and and particularly people who are not mathematicians it seems to exist and uh second of all you know it's fine actually if we take an object then we show that it it sort of deviates from this form and and what what have you but then we can see you know in process of effectively compounding multiple rule sets um what that deviation is. So you start with a earth is a sphere. Okay, it's not really but you know it shows us it's sort of somewhat like a sphere.

Then we say it's actually spheroid double and then we see with this but actually no it's more complicated. So that that's an acceptable way to get um to that. Um so interestingly enough I mean this partially intersects with uh kind of where we're going to get close to the end here but this sort of concept of you know fractals and beauty um which is actually 11 paper from 1994 and um you know this again complexity the concept of some sort of simplicity of formulas potentially some energy savings I know energy is sort of in the research program um so how do we get back to something that is really radically empirical or definitive ative. Well, I would say it's a bit challenging. I mean, this is sort of particularly when we bring up these other topics, even the psychological things because we can't totally escape them um being for the most part humans here. So, um should we shut up and engineer? Well, the response um that I think is very fruitful and interesting and provocative here is that our lab mission is not to produce philosophy that is undecidable and will hang out along the long list of ideas that have been kicked around for centuries with no resolution in sight.

Engineering in broad sense is a critical method for deciding between competing worldviews and frameworks. The best ones are the ones that enable the most fruitful relationships with the world and its diverse levels of agency. So I I would say broadly speaking I I would endorse this and agree with it but I would also endorse with the sort of caveat that it's a little bit challenging to know what fruitful exactly means um in this context. Here we have Kgrov, you know, on the left scribbling some formulas um that are more or less related to his idea of sort of algorithmic information theory and complexity. Um as well as some Schmidgubber stuff and then these sort of lovely fractals that you know we may be observing in fact in in you know different morphospace that is the sort of empirical version of it xenobats on the right and the and the like. Very exciting. Um but how do we bring it full circle? Well, I I'm going to say that one thing that is just very very clear to me um coming out of this research space and keep in mind I'm you know not an expert in this specific area although like I said my research intersects with the history of things and uh sort of database design is this now this is basically pulled out of this atomical compiler software um that is called planet form or plan form and then um more or less that allows us to plot all these different um shapes and sizes and interactions and this is um what I have done with a little script. You can actually look at the scripts because everything I use to generate is here on GitHub. Um but more or less the experiments I've done per year. So these um specific things were done you know early on in 1898. Um we have a bunch of things as well as the sort of publications um that have come out on a sort of time series um you know which has sort of increased more recently uh as cumulative but not but then experiments also have been kind of coming out and then the publications and then here you get the sort of cumulative morphology. So we have you know some steady growth a little bit early but now we actually have quite a lot of these sort of established uh morphologies particularly in this in this one area.

Um and I think this is a very helpful um way of sort of tying all the pieces together because as long as we can do this sort of systematically across different things uh we at least have the well doumented final version of morphology. So we have something similar for that I think with the xenobot literature and things that are coming out what has actually been observed. We don't necessarily fully have it, at least from what I can tell from outside of the predictive version. What are the what is the possible set of um things besides just saying anything in math is fair game. What is the what are the things all the different ways that xenobots could potentially um and then stating that and then and then plotting it against experimental data something like we saw in the route. So what I'm going to just suggest at the very end um is uh that would be great. I mean obviously the the there's a lot of research being going into it. um people on this call know much better than I the details of it. So I won't go in but you know a predictive morphospace language that cracks a biomectric code maybe slightly overstated but nonetheless I think that that there is um something that uh could be done very quite quite amazingly that also applies to the multiple of these different um permutations of the morphospace uh and specifically mapping the bioelectric patterns to the downstream gene expression cascades and morphological outcomes.

um at at the full version you know we could see this sort of route um type of methodology being super useful uh elucidating the mechanism non-neural memory not really the focus of this talk but I think it's something sort of sitting out there um that has been uh still to be decoded to a degree and then um education so at the beginning I think we would like to do some sort of seminar uh under the umbrella of SEM uh to to educate people particularly like missing midcareer professionals and AI Hi or whatever else that are interested um in these fields and would like to kind of get into them and see how they intersect um and uh you know there's quite a lot of people out there that I've just interacted with here and there um as well as the sort of knowledge map doing more formally. Now one of the things that's also here um within this specifically is I was able to take the same uh database literature and write a script that then was able to put this in the knowledge graph format and nano publications. Um I'm not actually sure if Tobias is on this call. I guess he'll pipe up if he is. Um but um that was definitely an interesting potential intersection point. Um and uh yeah, I have um some credits as well. Thanks for various people who've been involved in giving uh helpful feedback along the way uh to this um including various academic collaborators. But I know that many of the people who are here and maybe on this call as well are starting their own research institutes that are spin-offs to a degree of existing academic things or just uh covering spaces that are not particularly easy to cover in academia for various reasons. And so as a result um I think there's interest in having some formalization of the data format and way to sort of accelerate um various of these things uh including I know uh Michael you're part of the California Institute for Machine Consciousness as well. So there's various and you've I know you've also presented for foresight and and the rest of it. So um yeah that's uh so that's uh that's it for my presentation at the moment. uh would love any feedback or questions.

>> Super. Thank you so much. Uh questions from the audience, please.

David, go for it.

>> Oh, thank you for your fascinating talk.

Um I'd like to go back to the basian um hypothesis you had earlier. And um as you know for basianism the prior probability is a huge thing in determining you know where we go with the inference. Um and I'm wondering if the sort of materialistic hypothesis let's just say we start on the hypothesis that it's all physics and chemistry and there's no nothing going on mentally. there's no um mental any kind of mental representation going on in cells that this is all just physics and chemistry. So that's we start with that as a sort of default position right that that shapes all of our i our basian hypotheses the prior probabilities going forward. Um, so what it means is that the people that have to be convinced to get on board with this are the people that are strongly biased and again using going back to the bias thing, biased against this, right? So we we you start out with a program where that is basically the assumption a materialist assumption and then then you get evidence moving forward from that that can then prove these different hypotheses that you're testing.

Yeah, I well 100% and I think you know it's one of the reasons why sort of oriented um particularly at the end as so far of things that are you know relatively non-controversial and to a degree the the literature on these topics has been built up from those things where um there's either no prior research and no particular reason to doubt a particular thing um you know when it comes to these uh low lower level things whereas the moment you start intersecting where people already have strongly held value or viewpoints or a term obviously like pltonism maybe is one that could could be considered loaded. It's probably less loaded than other terms. Um then you are going to you're going to immediately face that um sort of issue that's going to be embedded in it. Um and I think that the overall the solution that seems the most concrete is to segment the data around as many different things that are sort of as concrete and as hard as possible so that you can create sort of momentum in that in that direction. And then if you ever have to do face those things then then hopefully you can do it delicately. Um but there's um I don't know that there's a better solution than that. Maybe if there is, I'm certainly open to to hearing it. But um >> Well, no, what I'm I I think that's the way to go. But I'm just saying in terms of your priors, I think you had one of the priors was six, right?

>> And it and and I'm saying that people from the materialist perspective might say, "Well, golly, that's way too high as a prior. I would put I would put my prior at um you know, let's say 0.05 05 or or point, you know, very low, right?

And then it takes even more mountains of evidence to get that probability up there. You see what I'm saying?

>> Yeah. The I was going to deal with this point to a degree and I'm kind of glad you brought it up because there's um you know there's interesting possibility within the sort of knowledge graph systems um and for that matter other semantic data as well, but that's more classic format. but then of having a scriptive layer on top of it that is more or less here's my you know here's the sort of default version but here's my version and to the extent that it's you know documented I this is kind of benefit of sort of aimatic thinking in general then you'd say well I accept this but I don't really accept this how does this change you know my and you can actually do that somewhat systematically and and you know in a cascading way how does this you know affect my view of you know this particular conclusion if I don't if I suddenly start doubting this other thing. Um, and those mental models can be done in some people's heads, but they become progressively more challenging the more, you know, moving parts there are. So, um, uh, so I think just documenting them is a good first step and that's one of the things that I think many people don't realize and why basis and thinking also has trouble getting off the ground in various places. People don't realize how embedded their their priors are without even being able to state what they are.

So, yeah.

Um, Edwin.

>> Yeah, thanks for your talk, Joel. And um, of course, I've been chatting to you about this for a while back. And, um, I I I'm interested in a lot of the I have a lot of questions. I I'll take one, I'll let other people in. Uh, the the notion of the morpho space interests me from from this perspective of Pltonism.

Well, I guess one could conceive of a kind of plonism here that stems from the from biology as such. These notions of beauty and tilos are like they're reminiscent of a kind of a a platonism of of a platonism of life, if you will.

And then there is a potential platonism of something that perhaps physicists would would like to to hone in on. um a a platonism of crude space or matter or or something like that. And to me, morphospace, the notion of the morphospace implies, and this is just something that's a figure of my imagination when I hear the word, it implies that the biological structures are somehow adapting themselves to a physical substrate. But of course, as far as I can tell, neither of these things are are um we don't know any of these things specifically with with you know, how how far um how far we have to go in terms of cosmology and whatnot.

I'm speaking of like priors. I'm curious as to like where do you think we should be? Do you first of all do you see this sort of discrepancy and do you think that we're forced to to work from one angle or the other or can we do them simultaneously or Yeah.

Um I'm not sure exactly what you mean by a discre discrepancy in this case but I mean certainly you know with with particular respect to this concept of ingress I would say that there's a a challenge in uh detecting sort of when an ingress has actually happened um and that is something I don't have a very obvious uh solution to uh you know even while taking it as plausible that that something like that that has happened um and I I'm very excited to see the sort of more observable sort of data on these things um sort of as it as it emerges. I mean some of the things that I I talked about and and obviously other people here on this call know much more about the xenobots or something like that that's sort of obvious in a way because there's human agency behind it because humans are partially driving that process and um and even these things that you know that were and maybe you don't need to include this but I think a more robust model would the degree to which we gravitate towards our interested in a particular set of phenomena is also the degree to which we're going to reproduce it is the degree to which you know we're going to have some sort of feedback loop that includes those type of things and you know for for that matter that's sort of what art is in is in a way that we are sort of reproducing things that we as humans find sort of aesthetically or otherwise interesting um and I don't think that that's a wrong way to do it per se and I think it could answer many of these things you know in the kind of pure form because I think for at least my interaction with many mathematicians is that people really find a natural affinity for this type of thinking and then that you know creates this also sort of feedback cycle. So >> and it and it becomes yeah it's very very feedback uhesque because it's kind of ironic you would end up in a situation where if you're going to say that the the lab is different from the lab of nature um you already made a metaphysical assumption you know so about the the involvement of humans making any difference as to the nature of how anything platonic or formlike would would unfold. Uh so but which comes back to the whole mind and matter discussion by the way but yeah I'm gonna shut up now.

>> Great. Um anyone else?

>> Um maybe just as a quick note which is um thank you uh everyone and thank you uh Joel. I wanted to make a very gentle um critique perhaps opinionated to the first instance where you mentioned for example beauty and how this or its perception can be uh of relevance or not. Um, of course, this is very personal or I mean it's a segment of let's say opinions um or yes or a stance in general because in a sense this it's only it's a pattern that is perceived um and it's a very specific category of a pattern and it's it relates to perception and we we have been discussing also a lot about how this perception is actually um embodied um very diversely and so Um, I I would never discard it. But simultaneously, I also wanted to praise a connection you made that I've never made before, which was with the Colola of Complexity. Uh, for me, it was it was I don't I don't know if I have anything of, you know, constructive to say right now about it, but I wanted to praise it because it it being something and I'm going to think about it.

>> Yeah, thank you. I'm not convinced by it personally. I just thought I would note it because I it's sort of out there as one, you know, plausible explanation for for certain types of phenomena that we observe. But thank you.

Anyone else?

Could I ask uh maybe a technical question? um just ho how how do you make those um the uh the networks that you showed at the beginning with the concepts and having the you know the prior probabilities and and and all of that. How how do you actually make those?

>> Um so the specific ones that were related to yours I I used a few different ways of making them until I got to a solution that I liked. But basically I set uh various LLMs to sort of parse all the the papers um that were available um and then sort of build it with with respect to specific parameters that has the probabilistic knowledge graph format sort of with the sort of weight of evidence um for each sort of sub item. Um, so I I gave it a little bit of sort of pre-prompting and then uh I specifically to told it to do it in latex format because that was what I like the output of the most for just readability.

>> Amazing.

Okay. All right. Thank you. Uh uh David.

>> Yeah. I have one question. this I guess it's a a minor side point but at some point in your presentation you said that um LLM's may be reasoning in a different way um sort of that maybe we should embrace I I I not sure what you were what your point was that there there it's a kind of a fuzzy logic it's it's an inference that maybe we should embrace. Can you say that again because you know a lot of the research I've seen a lot of interesting stuff that LLMs are not really reasoning like we are and they they get things they can get things really badly wrong because they don't really understand concepts like we do.

They just statistically relate symbols.

So can you can you say that again what you had in mind there?

>> Yeah, I've seen the whole range I think of LM output. Um, so I've seen some, you know, hor horrifyingly bad versions and some quite impressive versions, I would say. And, uh, you know, I guess I was leaning towards a positive, although I wouldn't always be that way with the statement I made, but the positives, uh, version of it was that, you know, partially for exactly what you were saying before, you know, humans aren't always used to formally naming what their basian priors would be in a particular thing. And yet an LLM not only can be forced to do this quite easily. Um it can find it a sort of natural way of kind of justifying its response and that makes it sort of inspectable. So and in that sense I can have you know a bunch of LMs running in parallel even just the the best pro models of the top AI companies of today um as an example of that and then you know one of them can give this output and then I can have it sort of evaluated formally in a way that says okay what is your formal assessment of the weight of evidence for you know this sort of thing and I think that that um lends itself I think sort of this is this is open I guess it's sort of a new topic not that many people working on per se, but that um that these type of models, I don't say they prefer it, but they it's a sort of natural way for them to kind of be doing the the sort of their version of deductive reasoning. And I think from my observation as well as the literature of um you know LMS as they've evolved that um the ones that have been form trained more systematically on sort of formal mathematics some of that has trickled over into a stronger use of deductive logic um that sort of you know bleeds over and that that and this is you know it's close to that maybe there's an inductive element to it whereas you know in these other forms um it can be very messy I mean I've seen and all kinds of crazy hallucination stuff as I'm sure many other people have. So um >> so but what you're saying is that at the end of the day there needs to be a reality check for their output because it could be really crazy even though probabilistically bas with basian reasoning or whatever we're talking about here it seems good but it's still radically wrong.

Um, it's a good question.

>> And and a test is is some kind of real thing like an experiment, right?

>> Where something really happens or it really doesn't happen, >> right?

>> Yeah. I mean, I'm not sure that's that different from humans, you know, in the sense that they can make either radically wrong hypotheses or radically wrong, you know, conclusions based on that and then um, you know, get themselves in some bind or or corner related to that. But yeah, I mean it certainly can can happen. Um, and I think that the degree, you know, the what we have, this is why I'm hopeful about it, is that we have an iterative process that's easier to improve around these things, too, because if a LM doesn't work and it fails, we just turn off the electricity or whatever, then say goodbye, you know, and then the next version comes out in 6 months or something like that. So that that version, you know, and we and we have this already in spades. So um you know if we can have this sort of formal model sort of be baked into various ones of them and then the ability to introspect and revisit then you can say you know what is your truth model around you know such and such characteristics I mean um and then and then it's inspectable as well so you should be able to drill down and see what they're sort of it exists that would be my hope I would say yeah but I'm hopeful at the moment Edwin.

>> Yeah. So you you mentioned Joel that that some of the people who you are crediting here are interested in starting or have been starting their own institutes. And in this context I think it begs the question like we've had these notions of what our disciplines of science are biology, chemistry or physics and so on. This was not always the case. Used to be natural philosophy.

We all know the drill and we we're in an era where maybe AI maybe LLMs are going to disrupt the disciplinary boundaries and I think that has implications for both I guess epistemology as such but also on a more practical level like how we uh how we build universities or or um yeah facil like facilities and and um the the afroioned um institutes maybe more grassroots institutes. So uh as people and I think there are more people here like that who are either starting institutes or like interested in doing more science promotion also on the sort of tactical level of how to organize things. Uh how how do you think this case which is quite it's quite a widely spanning case of everything from sort of practical clinical stuff to to metaphysics. How do you think this informs how we should go out in the world and try to uh um not disrupt for the sake of disruption but recreate the the academic environments as best we can.

>> Um I think something very similar to what I said you know with David you know where there's things where this stuff is kind of sticky because it's a certain ingrained process around it. Um, and so it's hard to change people's behaviors if they've already ingrained to think about things. And some things that were set up as social sciences. You know, I'm like, for instance, a big fan of Durkheim and some of these early social scientists to degree, but you know, the the some of the legacy depending on where you go, doesn't feel so sciency and so structured today. So, I think that there's an opportunity space usually in the in areas that haven't been covered. I mean to a degree the reason why I'm here today and excited about this project is because it's in a rapidly growing you know thing and just around anatomical compilers alone I can see you know this giant vast world of possible things that could be done and that excites me and it excites me even more if it's something that creates a sort of infrastructure behind it that then is extensible to other let's say new fields of knowledge um as as they emerge um and you know there's there's things that are just known you know where academia has a has a challenge in doing it. Some of it's just because it's something new. Um the I mean that the book I just wrote for MIT uh press was on um history of uh of crypto cipher punk movement basically cryptocurrency prior crypto cryptography and things like that before and you know these people basically didn't work with the academic world at all because they thought email lists were enough and um you know people like we die who's I think quite prominent philosopher at least was in certain rational circles now he he basically said I think we can do peer review as as well as the rest of everything particularly when it comes to these sort of formal mathematics we don't actually need academic institutions so I think that was a common feeling in certain of these sort of social groups that percolated let's say on the deep web um and you know to a degree percolated to the point where it where it created a very significant you know social upheaval in a way but um so I don't know I would just look for the opportunity areas that where there's not a necessary conflict as well personally I don't have a strong bias against academia in any particular thing. I just think that, you know, there's room for for innovation.