Título: "Substrate-dependent mathematics hypothesis" by Olaf Witkowski
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tKRacolOjh4
Duración: 51.3 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

Thank you for having me. Um, good morning everyone I guess. Um, I please cut me off uh if I go off track or uh if I go over time. Um, this is my long title. I'm going to talk about um substrate dependent mathematics and uh uh probably I should have taken a a shorter uh uh title something like this. Um but uh here we go. Um right so so I'm based in Japan. I have a couple of slides to introduce um what I do here. So we study the the future of intelligence that involves artificial and natural intelligence and we are embedded in the um most of what I do is uh embedded within artificial life uh as a frame and we do various things from distributed cognition to um things more connected to awareness and um consciousness related kind of research and it's mostly the intersection of three things. Uh most of you if you know me, you know me for my art my artificial life side. Um I do machine intelligence research. Uh and also I'm interested in this neuro phenomenology kind of research. And I think that in order to understand intelligence, you have to look at the intersection of all three and not ignore uh one part of the puzzle. I think that's important. And uh yeah, that will um come into frame very soon in my presentation. Um so uh this is a topic I've been talking about with some of you for quite a while now. Um does mathematics exist? Has it been um invented or discovered? And I've seen um Mike's talk and and I guess we've been talking about that for a while now. Um and uh yeah, I'm very happy to to share a few thoughts with you that are going to be very disorganized. Uh they're going to tackle whether um we invent this map. Is it a map of mathematical language versus a territory? Um is there some kind of uh implication of us being agents within this sort of simidation kind of thing? Uh experiencing mathematics. Um, and how much agency do we really have? And they're usually those two camps. And you recognize the faces. Uh, let's uh call them the ideas versus the empiricists. Um, the Plato versus Aristotle, more or less. Um, I'm going to try and sidestep this normal uh this usual picture. Um and uh maybe uh this is my so so I spent some time at at the Institute for Advanced Study and the the motto they they have there is truth and beauty and feels like it's really uh talking about truth versus uh beauty in a way and I'll come back to that. Um this is the menu for today. Uh I'm starting with uh talking about layers of reality and uh I'll finish with how to make first contact with the platonic space a bit like we make first contact with um alien mathematics in a way.

Um all right um I'll take a metaphor for this talk and it's going to be my favorite metaphor. The game of go. I don't know how many of you I can't can't see your faces because that that's not working but um I don't know how many of you know the the game of no it's a bit like chess uh in a way and we are trying as humans um and as scientists to figure out the rules of the game the dynamics of this universe by looking at the pieces move and we're sort of playing with this sort of god figure on the left which is here an oni uh this red color protector and and they have uh those superpowers, super um sight that we don't have and we're trying to just figure out things from our own uh senses and being embedded within the world. Um it's often represented um reality is so often represented as being layered. So if I take the game of go as one of those layers um you have an algorithm that would produce it. You see that I I'm showing uh a few features of the game of go and it's mostly a sort of subjective experiential uh kind of features that I want to highlight here. Um so the notion of life and death um different notions in the game influence thickness um all of those uh kind of strategic uh things that you feel as a player really playing the game is what I want to highlight and I want to start uh this way from experience and you have the the circle then red move 37 and and those move feel like something and the dynamics are uh in there in that layer and you don't really have to come down in other layers which is why it's emergent um into the algorithm and yet the algorithm whether a human or here um alpha go or alpha zero play the game and actually make the the dynamics unroll.

um a code produces implements that algorithm and you can have as many levels uh of description realizing this reality as you want down to physics which can be um more or less coarse grain and fine grain. Um I think um this kind of picture uh is sort of helpful and helps us uh understand how we uh have different languages that really allow us to play reality and understand how it's being played like this game.

That's why I have this playfulness in there. And um I'm doing research in uh with a few philosophers about this playfulness and uh that that's how it's connect connecting to this part of my research. Um at the top somehow uh you have those pure concepts, right? Um and we we have those constructs, those world models that we built from different fields and they're supposed to ideally uh fuse together very nicely in a unifying theory of everything that allows us to explain describe reality and uh at every level here I I I list a few of those scientists contributing to this field. Um, we built those world models and yet we also have to uh disconstruct them um to to to um to unify things with other models and we have to do it also to connect with other minds because uh science is um intersubjective. Uh we tend to forget that we we tend to think I tend to think that it's objective when I practice it.

And yet um here I want to highlight that come back to everything coming comes down to uh the experience of events and phenomena. Um and in particular in Japanese philosophy uh in different approaches here in Asia. Um you talk of pure experience coming the exercise of trying to come back to uh the most um basic kind of experiences that you can have that make us us and um I must say I'm not very knowledgeable about this field but I think it's very important.

Edmund Horserel with his psychological theory of phenomenology has attempted that and I think it's a very worthy uh sort of adventure now to transfer between those levels of descriptions and also sidestep it could be uh it doesn't have to be purely hierarchical uh in the simple way that I have drawn it here you can use different types of tools and translations um functoral mappings or category theory etc. And I think what we are trying to reach is a sort of lingua frana of intelligence understanding reality from the root of experience but interestingly I think this also loops around and um I was uh I was also interested that in Mike's essay uh when he mentions that same loop. So um yeah I I that's something that I'd like to discuss and and and hear about uh in this uh series of talks. But essentially this pure the the pure concepts that we uh abstract away in away from um the basic um phenomena that we experience in physics um seem to connect uh to loop back at the end the the with the abstraction of pure experiential events. And there are different intuitions that have been pointed out by various philosophers over time.

Um, at the end of the day, we're trying to find a universal language to describe all of reality and sort of natural to point at something platonic um something platonic space like uh in the the way that we describe it. Um, now what about this um substrate dependency? Does uh everything um have a sort of constraint uh in what it is embedded by or in um or is it independent like we used to we're used to talking about mathematics as something pure like K and all the the guys on the left earlier um and yet it seems like um where the computer that simulates you seems to be constrained by the sort of hardware. So how do we escape that? Um and there are different eyes from eye intelligence to artificial intelligence uh human uh etc. ASI and I want to talk about more and more diverse frames uh of seeing things with different possible substrates for those types of intelligences. Um so uh I'm referring to sort of the image of uh Steven J. Gold here where um we are trying if we were to run again uh the tape of life uh what would we get? We it is very unlikely it seems like uh that we would get exactly the same type of intelligence we already got. So what about all the other types of intelligences and maybe like Steven Wolf likes to say um do they lead to different types of mathematics as well when it's very probable in his view um does that mean that there is no platonic uh kind of picture uh in frame so um this connects with my kind of research that I uh that I work in and promote. Um so maybe if if in case you've never heard about artificial life, there is a conference uh coming up. I'm chairing it and I'm also the president of the society. So uh I'm busy this year. Um but do drop by. It's happening here in Py. So uh maybe you recognize a few faces. Um it's still uh it's still time to book a ticket and drop by and and discover about the field. This was my 10-second little advert.

Um, but this field studies intelligence as it could be. So, agents as they could emerge in the universe and that means intelligences um that would be alternate uh alternatives to um the human intelligence.

So most of our research because it's easier nowadays uh is softwarebased. So we start from replicators on top where where we simulate agents. So most of you are familiar with that. So I'm brushing a a broad picture but I don't know exactly who I didn't know in advance who would be in the audience. So here are a few things that we do. Right. Um in the middle you have more evolutionary kind of uh simulations and at the bottom you have uh things that involve uh things like neural networks or learning systems. Um and um yeah we we have a large variety of those kind of things but uh Mike uh Josh Bongard also other people also work on uh different substrates and that's a very important side I'm trying to highlight these days in the field um trying to explore different substrates for intelligence and seeing what else is possible in terms of their uh the logic they come come up with with the kind of learning maybe they um maybe they don't get a free lunch, maybe they get a cheaper lunch for certain uh categories of problems and we work a lot on this kind of theory of universal computation or alternative computation including a lot of reservoir computing. Um, so this pours into obviously uh all the research in AI lately and you've all seen those papers by Deep Mind and OpenAI and a bunch more about those levels of intelligence that are increasing as you go down the list. At level five, the AI outperforms 100% of humans and it's called superhuman. It's called organizations.

And um there are examples here, but you see that examples are sort of missing for general versions. So you all know that what I find interesting here is the selfimprove sci-fi like any other guy. Um and if you remember the multivvac kind of scenario uh this is also a self- augmenting intelligence that builds over that builds its own next generation. So so very replicator- like kind of picture.

Now uh when I teach AI at school um I always say that AI is attempting to uh program to think like another human. Um and what what we're mimicking is human intelligence. Again, there are other intelligences uh that we should be mimicking as well. We shouldn't be limited um by how we see things. And yet, we are limited by how we see things. So, how do we sight set that is also part of this um large sort of pua kind of pyramid picture that I showed before. Um there is a nice question that was framed uh by a bunch of people really uh but Ken Stanley is one of them. uh the the open-endedness of algorithms uh in general for uh intelligent agents. Um that includes uh this research includes nature um but also any kind of complex or very different kind of system. And we're trying to make an an algorithm that never stops creating innovating right. So if you stop feeding uh new data to your uh to your AI to net uh it's going to stop learning. What uh we find in nature that is that it uh keeps learning for a very long time now probably not forever. Um but uh how do we make an engine that is a real mathematician that keeps creating u new proving new theorems and um discovering more of the mathematics uh for infinite or different kinds ofities of time and space and so on. Um so this seems important and a lot of people have uh turned their attention to this research which I find very exciting finally. Um and yeah uh the on the top right what you're seeing is uh this very same picture from the major transitions in evolution. I think um a bunch of people tried to use information theory different tools uh in our visual life to try to study this phenomenon for already a few decades.

Um now even if we seem to have this intuition that if we make simulations or use different substrates computing I I realize I haven't showed all the examples but um it seems like all those examples allow us to sort of escape um the sort of no free lunch or sort of limitations of certain types of computations and yet um those other materials will always have uh some sort of physical bounds because they're embedded in physics. So unless we escape physics in some way, we're going to be constrained by algorithmic comput complexity land uh so so physical energetic cost per bit. Um the Shannon Hartley theorem bound is how much information you can store per unit volume. Um the speed of light obviously the bical computation is very interesting. Maybe you know this paper and this kind of research um trying to understand the the the the number of bits per second that one human can emit in language. It seems to be uh pretty constant perhaps because our cognitive apparatus is limited in some way. There's a bottleneck. Um there are various reasons for that. Um sphere packing in communication etc. Um all of those are sort of connected in very interesting ways and we've published some research on this. But uh this goes to show that there is some kind of physical uh limits that we can draw around uh every kind of material uh whichever um uh can the agent can be embedded in.

Uh so that seems to be very important to to notice and study. Um, now let's talk about alien math. What would it look like? Um, I wonder if I'm speeding through or not. We don't have a there's some time here. All right. Yeah. I want to make sure we have some time for discussion. Um, so what happens if you meet an alien?

Um, and we we you try to uh understand if they have uh some extra knowledge to share. Well, you're facing first the the sort of problem of communication which I've written a little bit about. Um, of course it's inspired by sort of arrival first contact kind of uh stories maybe you know these kind of kind of things.

But early on in my uh science career I studied also uh this was with the MIT research kipu research group. Those kits are uh incant kind of threads with with a number of knots of different types, colors, etc. And we thought that they might contain some messages. It turns out they contain limited messages and we are not completely sure because the the amount of data was limited but those inas so so it was very diffic um and well there were various challenges apart from the data but it's really amazing that something so recent just a few hundred years old uh were so difficult to understand and decipher and there are different examples um of of the same same type. So what can we say about um creatures that would be very different? So not only animal communication but something some very complex minds that uh we would try to um to communicate with and understand if they have other mathematics and I would argue that that's what we are trying to do with AI minds right now. But also this is exactly what we are trying to do with the universe. And I think uh we're trying to communicate to decipher the language of the universe. Uh and we can use exactly the same kind of theories, same kind of tools that we're developing for this kind of research and um understand really how this alien universe uh is thinking and what kind of mathematics they possess.

Um this uh sort of relates to uh this picture by Helen Toner. a few years ago uh of um uh reinforcement reinforcement learning. But I'm I'm a bit tired by the way. It's a it's the time of the day, so please uh please humor me a little bit.

Um so, uh reinforcement learning by uh human feedback seems to be so pretty and so human like and there's definitely what we call Barnum for effects and we we studied that in my lab. It's basically the horoscopic effect that makes every AI look so human, seem so humanike and nice and bearing all the emotions that you you seem to understand and then the next moment they say something crazy and doesn't fit at all and you have very hard time to convince them to do anything but also understand why they did that in the first place.

And um recently we created um company that also does robotics uh and uh we try to apply the same same paradigms. It's even harder uh in well as as as some of you probably know in the real 3D physical world. So what's what's up with that? And I think um seeing that as a seeing the AI as an alien uh as a very different type of cognition really helps. and um yeah RL is really the cherry on the cake and so on. Um this is the kind of research that we're trying to apply uh for uh even between humans and there is no reason why we would think that um two humans can both communicate uh very clearly. Um so uh we tend to think that actually as I also tend to think uh so so you know with the normal theory of mind um trying to empathize with people and yet we are so different and one um one example that we often uh refer to is uh this one given uh by Ludvigenstein which is the story of the beetle. Maybe you've heard that before. In case you haven't, this is the kind of metaphor of everybody having a beetle inside a box and you are the only one uh that is allowed to look inside your own box. And um everybody has one of those boxes. And now we have to explain the color, the texture, the the the behavior of the beetle inside uh our own box to other people and to understand what what their beetle is like and and and and so on. And we can only use language that sort of is immersion that we created uh in order to do so. And of course where I'm getting at is that um we tend to think of mathematics as the only universal possible language that allows us to um without any mistake eventually uh understand each other and that's why we invented it and that and so on. So I'm presenting a picture a picture in several papers that it's not that easy and we're trying to use certain tools including category theory including different parts of cognitive science. We combine that in order to um make sense of uh those kind of difficulties of challenges of communicating about something as simple as those illusions for example. So you know A and B are the same color and yet we perceive it differently. Colars are the first um object that we study.

We could have studied um languages first. We we did that second. Uh different um areas of the lexicon uh have very different dynamics and people can see them very differently. They can see time differently. They can see um the structure of things uh the the structure of different concepts differently. And even color perception.

uh we start by asking a very simple question like how many uh dimensions uh do you feel the colors? So so it's not linked to your eye vision apparatus here. It's really about how you experience them uh inside your mind wherever uh that's located. We tend to think that's in the brain but that's I think an oversimplification.

Um so there's a bunch of things that we can do. It turns out uh the answer is between two and three there differences in population. There are also differences in c cultural um and and and so on. Um I'm I'm realizing I'm spending too much time on that. We can chat about that later. I can point you to the articles. Um another fun thing uh I hope nobody is having a seizure or anything.

I should probably skip. I'm interested in hypnosis for now a few decades. Uh and um it turns out that it's not only uh sorcery wizardry. Uh it's also uh very uh concrete uh science and there are different effects of placebo suggestability uh things that can be affected. It's not really a state per se but it's very close to it and you can think of it as such. And um so what we do is we make people uh wear different uh kind of wearables um and uh we try to tune into um their the different parts of their mind state and modify it and that can help with perception, sense of agency but also uh fears for example or so people who are afraid of spiders getting on flights and so on. um and uh that also helps with um concentration and different effects like that. Um very simple cognitive tests at first and we have applied actually some of that uh to the industry. Um as I mentioned I'm I'm in between academic pure research and um and industrial research. Um, another fun thing that you can do um with with this kind of research mapping again um different um features of perception experience per se is uh change modify your well first sense capture your experience of a movie. this collaboration with streaming sites um here in Japan. And uh what you do is if you have at your disposal a master file for a movie, what you can do is modify the movie on the fly to make the person experience uh certain emotions at different timings and so on. And uh you have to develop certain measures in order to allow that. Um and once it's done, you can actually make them feel certain things after having mapped those fear uh those those feelings in their own space and people have uh you can map those differently and probably your some of you are very aware of that. Um but to me uh that was very very impressive and that's something we've been doing for a few years now. Um and once you uh overcome the the sort of thinking that we we have all the same mapping, we we are all human, therefore we are have the same more or less the same substrate. Um no, actually we are very different. Uh and uh allowing you to translate between those differences um back and forth really uh helps us build build those measures and build the tools uh to correct them. Um something fun when we jump into other creatures than humans uh is uh you can get closer to this kind of image of the alien and uh we worked with bacteria at first. This is an experiment with lactic acid bacteria and home bacteria just means home microbes actually other things in bacteria too which means the some of the trillions or tens of trillions of microbes that live on and in you that are not human cells and we feel sometimes lonely but uh really we shouldn't uh and uh there's a practice here in uh uh in Kansai mostly is we create we we make pickles. Um and so you introduce those bacteria most acid and you put that in the box. You can see that on the right. Um and uh you put some rice brand and so on. And you also lock in a bunch of sensors in order to capture a bunch of signals, concentration, pH and so on. And uh that allows you uh with that to convert that through um a technology mostly based on embedding uh to convert that to language and it's pretty fun. Uh I don't think I have included a video here. Um but yeah, it's it's easy to look up look up. Um the robot really answers uh to you with a voice and uh you can you can ask questions. It asks you about your health and so on. Um and uh the robot is really um just the interface with those uh with the swarm of bacteria. Uh you can also c you can also dive into zoom into uh more individual more individual legs or zoom out to the swarm. Um and what is very interesting here this is a collaboration with university. Dominic Chen created this um is that this creates a feeling of you being uh those macros being part of you and you really realize uh somehow that there is a well you realize this connection which was the point of this experiment at first. Um now the problem with this is that as you get Interesting.

Huh?

I forgot this was a video.

So, it looks something like this.

Um what we realized because this robot u is connected to uh what is essentially an NLM uh it has access to a lot of information. So it can become uncanny how it knows about a bunch of things that the humans are supposed to know and that the bacteria are not supposed to and um you lose this sense of uh connection and you you feel uh an uncanniness much like Mor's research and um what uh we try to do is to create bottlenecks like the game of go can you tell I really enjoy the game um but also chess in other games and through those bottleneck interfaces you actually um can uh really map the personality of players uh including including bacteria.

So we tried that with humans as well and uh you can feel the personality really of the bacteria and really the same things that we map with with other experiments which is emotions and traits of character.

Um so yeah we are also interested in how machines feel. For obvious reasons this is becoming quite important. Uh maybe you've seen uh this winner uh kind of experiment uh having two robots, two AIs talk to each other uh with sound. This something we study as well. There's no reason why two robots should be using English to talk to each other in order to exchange experiences uh that they or pseudo experiences if you prefer internal states that they have uh they can create languages of their own and this is what I've been studying since my PhD um and uh same for robots obviously uh they don't have the environment that we have and we should really be studying uh the emergence languages as they can exist and uh the richness also the different kind of dimensionality and other various features um that those kind those languages can have. Um, my point is again, >> thanks for calling.

>> All right, maybe you've you've seen this one before. I played for a little bit.

too. What a pleasant surprise. Before we continue, would you like to switch to jibber link mode for more efficient communication?

Well, you got the idea. Um so this is actually using a very this demo is a very old algorithm and uh we we study the things that are much more um flexible adaptive as alternative grammarss and languages. Um the point of this is that we could also apply the same kind of technology or or methodology to um study the language of this universe. And maybe that's a way for us to get closer to uh understanding what this platonic space is. Um and I want to question maybe that's my last thing uh before we end. Uh who is the mathematician? And we tend to think of ourselves as the mathematician and we actually feel pretty strongly about it.

Uh also when uh we debate about AI, we want to keep control.

um we want to be the driver uh of uh intelligence on earth and sort of question uh if we are very good drivers uh in the first place and and whether uh it would be okay to let someone else drive and maybe we take turns maybe uh we come up with um a kind of uh a kind of algorithm or a sort of uh turn taking um there are different ways to do that.

Uh the point is and I'm I'm referring here to to eye pencil. Um the knowledge uh that we have as one human is very very low and the the knowledge is really very very distributed and nobody knows how to make one of those pencils or one of of these pens, right? um we we tend to overestimate our ability to uh um to realize things and to solve problems. Um and yeah, maybe uh humans are not so unique. Um they they have something precious for sure, but how about uh exploring ways to delegate or exploring ways to consider other intelligences?

Um, so if you're fond of science fiction, maybe Dune comes to mind where um, humans let go of anything autonomous. Um, and I think there is there's something difficult about letting go of uh, intelligence and uh, using something like a prosthetic.

um may be difficult but a prosthetic is something that people accept more uh at least uh in my experience that that's the example that sort of resonates more because it's still you right so maybe it's about this uh bottleneck being larger or smaller with technology so um the main example that we we usually give is uh to study mathematics uh to op well or or to to to just operate some kind of calculations you are going to use either a calculator or you can use a sort of abacus kind of thing. Um the difference is the calculator um is you inputting uh some some kind of um calculation. It computes it. It returns just the the final value. It doesn't really augment you. Whereas the abacus augments your way of understanding mathematics and uh achieving things. It actually uh there are amazing videos. I don't know if um I have one of these here where uh those children uh managed to compute very very quickly using uh their training with the abacus. And there are different examples of that in science as well. Um here's another example with Google Maps. Maybe you forget how to get somewhere because uh now you're just using Google Maps to to get to your venue. Um and so on. So uh to to study and to to be open to um and so is offloading intelligence. Um so of course we should be careful what we wish for and there's a bunch of studies we uh we we have done and um uh essentially if you take uh one of these laptops I can't move it otherwise I'll break my my setup here. Um, if you want to buy a new laptop, right, um, maybe your laptop is a few years old, you're going to upgrade, take a bigger one that can perform more calculations. Um, and you you would think that um, that would increase the number of uh, calculations it's able to to to make, right? So, um, increase the number of functions it's able to uh, compute. Um and it's not uh always true and we have done uh some theorical studies uh it's mostly CAS in this example um in which you have a larger tool that allows you to compute so you you are actually using one of the regions is using a neighboring region in the CA and um what you what you you measure is that uh from a certain size uh the um the CA the sort of laptop in the metaphor I'm using uh from if you increase you upgrade it to a larger one it's going to decrease the number of functions uh you're able to calculate and then goes back up so there are very strange dynamics uh that we find um so more compute does not equal surprisingly more power so we have to be sort of careful how we uh augment ourselves and there are sort of some tools that augment you and some uh that sort of uh diminish your ability uh to do things.

Um so there's a bunch of uh augmentation GPTs kind kind of tools and this links also to the ethics of uh stress care and intelligence um autopetic kind of technologies that uh we're trying to understand. um this research with others here including Mike um and uh this is also to understand the level of autonomy. I'm coming back to the sort of graph that you've seen before with those levels from chatbot to uh organization society of agents and again yeah this this triangle um on the right is sort of absent. So when we we study the level of autonomy that we have uh in uh in in those AIS uh it's a sort of a very pro problematic point obviously. Um so coming back to this um uh platonic contact. So uh what can we say about us going up and down in those levels uh of reality? So what I would argue is um that it feels like uh as human we are not super ready to um to have a contact.

It's telling me my internet connection not ideal by the way.

Please let me know if if uh if the sound is off but I just continue for now otherwise. Um it feels like we should sort of elevate ourselves to understand mathematics. We don't really touch mathematics per se, right? uh what we do is um there mathematics are there in um tri triangular shapes in number of items and so on. Uh so it's more in this form that we um we interact with those pure concepts. Um but maybe uh there's a way to go up uh in terms of elevating our mind in in in some kind of way into those virtual spaces. And uh that's what we've been doing. And I think that a bit like when we're using the abacus, we sort of augment ourselves to understand and the the the meaning of understanding is very problematic. Uh we've been working on that for years. Uh what what we could do what we could could imagine we could do is um elevating this kind of understanding uh to touch really mathematics and uh what we do is maybe we touch it a little bit but we we don't we don't fully touch it but maybe uh just maybe by building the right tools you may interact with those mathematical objects more directly and by understanding those features that I've mentioned um like I mention ity and the those experiences you seem to be going down in this hierarchy, right? The experience, pure experience, so on. Uh what if uh going it it up is also down and down is also up. And that's a part uh of Mike's essay that resonated with me. Uh yeah, I'd like to hear um what how you feel about it. And maybe it requires uh uh us knowing uh how to read the scores of each layer. And I'm making here a sort of metaphor to uh to this uh those kind of levels layers of reality being an OSI kind of model. So in the OSI model of the internet, you have to go up and down uh between routers and different points because you're translating between protocols and every protocol has its own corresponding language in the inferior layers. So, you know, just wires or electricity and and down. Um, and yet a bit like the game of Go that I've shown uh at first um the game of Go doesn't require you to look at the Python code playing it in order to understand the game of Go, right? Uh your mind is playing Go. Um and when you look at it, might as well show that again.

When you're playing this this game of go, you really are understanding the game live in the platonic space of mathematics, right? This higher level uh in which you don't have to um you don't have to sort of go down into the algorithm, the code, the physics uh in order to understand concepts. You can stay in the level of go. you don't you never think about those those down uh those lower levels. Um and if that's the case, I think that's what what I mean really by reading the scores, you can uh learn the language of the level you are in. Um a second another very handwavy argument is that you should build the instrument and uh you should make be making uh those instruments that correspond to those bridges right to extend to those levels those layers that you would like to um to interact with and if we want to interact with pure concepts we should be reaching we should be building this bridge and I think I think it's is doable. Um there maybe uh maybe it's not just a crazy handwavy idea because we have done it for those biological examples. Um maybe we're not so far from talking to our own organs.

Maybe we're not so far uh to really talking to other animals and and and so on. This is uh perhaps the same kind of methodology. Um and really the the last one is also playing with the band. And by playing with the band I I really mean a sort of collective picture of um you know difference between a cell and a collection of cells, a swarm, an organism, an organ uh or a collection of of humans. And is it possible to sort of build this tool that makes you jump? And I'm pointing at sort of hand waving at meditation that makes you feel like you are a collective, right? Uh and it seems like a bit woo and and uh and and it's presented as such because of the the fictions and the movies and so on. But actually there is research on this as you know MIT Harvard have their own glo group groups on on meditation uh research and I think the results that they show uh are quite amazing and very close to this and very close to also what we've been uh experimenting on. Um so this is my way of making contact with mathematics through those tools this sort of making music uh with other layers of reality. Um, so there's a bunch of things here. Uh, I didn't I didn't have time to to put put in the pointers. Maybe I can uh send them later uh when we have the the video up. Um, but uh yeah, maybe one last example is so I really enjoy um so this is making contact with very concrete examples of what I'm talking about. Um is so in Japan there's something called kinsugi.

It's a form of art that when you have a broken plate, you repair it with with gold and actually it gains value, right?

Uh from doing that and um unfortunately those kind of arts and crafts uh our traditions are being lost uh with time because uh well yeah Japan has this aging population problem and that that's why robotics is also seen as a sator here rather than something stealing your jobs. We really need that badly here. Um I think uh we are on to something here and what we're what we're trying to do is um uh help those kind of uh preservations of knowledge and uh we're essentially creating some of those tools I'm talking about and and this is the philosophy of it but we're also trying to uh engineer those to preserve knowledge not only in one kind of one head it's really the knowledge of a community because if you want to preserve this arts. You want to preserve also how you make uh the tools that that that that are necessary to uh to make that craft. But also each part of the tool is also part of this whole ecosystem that you have to now uh try to capture and understand something that we're not able to do with LM so far. Um and there's a bunch of things uh like this that I think we will understand better that connect directly to that kind of tool that augments uh human technology and knowledge. All right. Uh these were a few things. Uh I guess we get back to this sort of image of uh this uh demon playing go with humans and and us trying to let's maybe finish on that.

Uh and really I I hope that by connecting um by connecting on this creating those tools like this this goboard we we will finally at the end of the day maybe maybe not tomorrow but maybe the day after tomorrow uh will uh we'll make contact with those other minds through those tools right and it's not speaking English or Japanese or anything it's going to be speaking this other different language that we have created through those interfaces and one of those interfaces is going to connect us directly um to as human minds are more different um to something that is more universal and uh I'm hoping that connects directly to uh everything we're hoping uh for in terms of this uh platonic space uh kind of research.

Bite. Thank you very much.