Título: "Is Mathematics Animated?" by Mariana Emauz Valdetaro
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xVYP76CSmO4
Duración: 34.3 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

Thank you so much for having me and thank you for the opportunity. I would also like to thank all the uh all the thinkers that came before us um and all this legacy that was left sometimes encoded in these different kind of operative languages but there's so much richness in in all the materials in all the literature um that I'm always like in awe um and and furthermore I'm also incredibly thankful to all the kind words and support um throughout this project. Um and so with this proposal, you know that we have uh patterns that ingress and that these patterns are mathematics. I would like to uh let it be very clear that I don't mean mathematical formalization. I think it was Benjamin Leons. he had this specific um definition for um his proposal of what mathematics is and although I'm still writing of upon what I what it seems that mathematics is there's so many good writings on it already in terms of this narrative and this construction that is done over time historically and so this presentation or the scope of this pro this project is not about that it is about uh if accepting completely the premise that we have patterns and ingress and thus to explore it for me this is a transport problem. Um I in the 1500s Jordan had this beautiful insight you know that it is not possible that a body glides towards infinity or downwards. Evidently as moving it uh verifies in it all its movements or transmutations as in generation does not look how to do what it cannot be done or achieve and the same goes for spatial movement um that does not look for space out of reach. Um and I guess the gist is that given that mathematical patterns uh or these patterns they ingress they they have a source they have an origin and they at least my interpretation and they have a target and they have means um to traverse time or space um to reach um and I found this very operative uh in the sense to to explore this um there's also If we we think of it, it's very direct or at least directed. Um because they have a source and they have a target. Um and if their objective for example is to reach somewhere um we have you know it's a keen to equifality.

Um, so for I mean I know it's slide one but if I'm going to say if mathematics is animated maybe I can say yes. And is it intelligent? Well William James I would say you know this is on the table. Um so definitions I borrowed um equipality uh from general system theory um which is reaching a goal u by uh different means. Um in this case it can be pathways like developmental. Um but if the goal is some sort of organization or state that is coherent or um even if far from equilibrium uh I I feel that this fits um and also I want to propose a definition for spectral um which can be viewed as encoding environments dependent dissipation and microfll statistics for example uh or we can see it as exponents and curvature functions in symmetry informed accounts.

Um moreover we can also see it as compact encoders of transport and coupling um which are the same ingredients that shape uh dissipative structures linking matter light and life um and transport I mean there are a lot of transport theory theories and I'm writing something that is like do we need another transport theory which I think yes for this case yes for ingression mechanisms I think we do u because I'm I'm my suspicion is that even though there is this coupling with cognitive glue which some of mechanisms we we know uh I think there is a a partnership with in this transport may require new mechanics or at least from sorry I drink water And so one thing I found really interesting is that we can have all these patterns they are resemblance or there's some sort of resemblance and I find really interesting that to have um to propose something to be for example um equivalent to something else or to prove you know that there there is symmetry at play you need to move and you need to transform something and you transform something from one thing into another. Um and well and I find this it's not a singular move. It requires um other things. It requires something that moves it or for it to move it. But it already, you know, it's as almost you cannot have like on the bootstrap of things like how the first thing came to be. Um I like this very much because it's a constructive act. Um and and I also like the ethmological note for example on compute where you have like to reckon or prune together.

Prune I added um because I think it's it's in interesting further along. Uh but then you have symmetric which is you know measure together and then you have geometric which is measure space. uh and so you have a lot of measurements going on you know which implies some sort of uh device but also a reasoning agent right to actually be able to measure it um and so I did I'm not going to present it here but I did something interesting which was um on this thesis of computational symmetry uh and then I threw like a first order uh uh logic or unfolds more specifically which is just a semantic way um to to to compute like some sort of logic proof um to do it all William James you know that for you to compute you know the symmetry like you need to be u you know it is an intelligent act I guess you said you're solving a problem you're reaching a goal which is to be the same while moving or to transform yourself or in transformation while maintaining this link you know to your identity and and so I found this really interesting. Um so for now also platonic space let's we can understand it very freely um personal take I see it as some sort of like canonic or canonicism uh with a respect that it from our perspective it would look like invariant or eternal um which perhaps just means that you know these patterns their origin they don't have time for example you know they have you know another space that does not need time maybe has all the time which is something that I like to think of um and so okay so we're reaching the same goal like in this case of symmetry it means that you have an observable invariant that stays fixed with turnover they can be molecular chemical thermal electrical um which is in sense exactly what symmetry and transport are said to preserve and then by different means uh that you know can switch along the symmetry related options and still succeed uh which is um you know in systems theory notion of equipality um so again I was clearly very excited about this um but I think there's there's something really special here um but okay transport you know what are we trans what what is a transport so the pattern is ingress you know obviously they need to have um a means to um but perhaps this is a message. I mean I propose is a message um and this message more classically um you would have the noise source at the channel um and I throughout this project I I've come to understand that perhaps the noise is not at the channel or the proposal is that to see noise as something that passes through in this case or in this context only that I mean uh you know the noise This is the message which in the case for example if you are computing a symmetry what it is not symmetric when you're computing it uh it's the difference uh between the states and so this would always be considered noise because it does not make sense uh but actually does it's a organization uh reinforcement mechanism or signal uh by the difference which it would be very inexpensive also in the sense. So instead of carrying on the entire structure, you just carry the difference. Um it would also be structured.

Um so also important is that if we look at this like message passing um perspective you also you have feedback um or at least in principle if one can receive messages and then I'm going to propose like the poly computational for now even though I didn't I didn't propose it yet but there is this transceiving property which means we can receive a message but we we as a planet or we as a person there is a poly computational architecture at play and a lot of messages are going up and down or within the structure and outside the structure and they're sensing and so I think the important thing is that there is this notion that there is feedback um and that's from this perspective uh the robust scaling of goals um could be the invariant um in polycomputers uh for which I argue that is the material expression of priors where the goal is achieved by different instances of forms uh and is oriented at exploring space uh through growth um and I unfortunately I'm I'm not going to have time uh to show everything I wanted but this I found really curious um which is there's a lot of discuss discussion within mathematics about the origin of mathematics and true and there's this um neuropys physiological and uh behavioral study about the reaction of mathematicians to formulas or expressions um and and yes and and there there is well in the study shows that um it is it's it's not culturally dependent. So even though it activates the same areas that would be res responding to for example um aesthetics or moral judgment which are said to be for example uh culturally dependent in this case when the reaction uh to for example oiler's identity it does not depend culturally and so this give there's this sensation that Um it's not that is universal, but it's something that transcends culture. Um and yes uh and so well the proposal is that these messages that are special temporal uh intuitions uh they are not constructions of the mind. We construct and we formalize them from our minds. Uh but the first impact or the the reception of the signal is something external which I understand it is controversial. Um but we live in a world in motion and so we can be very little or embryo and we would feel the pulse uh of being in a nested architecture. There's also the laws of nature, winds, there is this there is circadian rhythms and so there is a lot of ways where spatial temporal uh intuition uh can be transmitted.

Um, sorry, water.

Um, I really admire.

I don't know if he will listen to this and ever. Um, but he had a little bit of a problem with um with information theory in the sense that he wanted to apply it to biology.

like he wanted to relate it to biology because there was a lot of for him the biological information and the way that systems cohered uh within um hierarchies um it needed it needed to conform also with information theory um and a few years ago when I bumped into his concept of um it's complexity from noise and he has a specific definition for complexity that um may not really important uh for now. But um in what he tries to convey is that there is this sense of novelty. So noise actually brings the novelty. Um um okay. And so we have a message that is passing and we have a signal uh and we have a poly computer which I'm um saying for now that is a transceiver. We can also say that is it transductive or a mechan of trans transductive um architecture. Um and if we ask what is the goal um what what are we going to do with this uh special temporal intuition? Um I would argue that is in this case it's by simulative in the sense that these messages to explore space uh actually allow us to do constructions in space and then to explore space. Uh so it's almost as if we're it's an an intelligent echo uh going into intelligent echoes and okay I don't know if you agree with this uh Mike and NL but a for me a poly computer is a multis scale competency architecture okay and so itself and for all its instances it must compute these equivalent states to persist um as a pattern that is recognizable amidst turnover. So it means that everything moves. Uh and there must I guess our our big problem here is is how do all these small parts and all the big part has a canonic reference of what it ought to be while everything is moving. Uh because we tend to look at it at very like static but in fact is it's this is I feel that this is very complicated. For example, you can have uh an olive tree, a Portuguese olive tree, and you can have like a thousand of them and just in Portugal and then you will have a thousand everywhere else. And but would putting them all together bring us the cannon of an olive tree. And how is this cannon of an olive tree is connected to, for example, the idea of a tree? Um and and I know we're talking about like very abstract and then very concrete which is for example in the case of tissue regeneration even though we don't really know the order of if what came first if it's abstract or concrete for now. Uh but I do feel that the problem is pretty much the same. Um but there is an invariant for us which is this motility of a pattern. Uh and I also argue that this is a geometric effect. geometric in the sense that we are measuring space. Um and officially or classically when a curvature parameterize uh the admissible transport to make it uh still the same um there must be there is a selection of the invariance that defines this goal and now we start to connect this with the noise. So uh while the poly computation architectures may not have for example the cannon something akin to for example an ancient mechanism like b electricity may been carrying that information for us. Uh and since the beginning of time we have a way or the computational architectures have a way to make sense of this noise. Um, and for example, like forums are maintained through admiss motions that reckon together and measure together. I also really like this idea. Um, because they're poly computational architectures and so one proposes that they are reckoning together. They're measuring together internal states and external external states. Um, and these ought to have equivalent classes.

Um and I have a lot of written onressions.

Um but I think one idea that is fun is to think that one type of aggression can be for example this type of like influx.

First I had like inspire but perhaps uh not as optimal but then you have inform because we do have patterns that make forms and then we do have patterns that uh perhaps as thoughts you know the they are transient. Um and here this also became rather complicated. I guess the scope is just to convey that all and I like to say the laws of nature uh all the laws of nature they have um or physics there is geometric interpretation allowed for all of them.

Uh thus my conclusion that um nature has geometric interpretation.

Uh and because of this thermodynamics has geometric interpretation and for us for example to compute or to formalize the thermodynamic process in a dissipative structure that is far from equilibrium may be really hard in terms of computationally and in terms of amount of formalization. But if you look at it geometrically, it becomes a little simpler.

Um this is also my proposal for um where are these cannons? So the canons or the platonic world cannot be very far or if it is which is a proposal for after if it's very far away the way that a poly computational architecture can access that cannon or receives that cannon it it's very preent or it's very precise in time uh and for each the proposal it's a bit in the air but it's this relationship with time so We do have within the logic of irreversibility uh even though our laws allow um for um um reversal in time symmetry uh terms.

Perhaps what we're talking about is something I've been trying to consider as it's not an imaginary part of physics but it's just something that can be done instantaneously or feel that is instantaneously um I don't know if you can see my cursor okay but the idea is that through what we've seen or what I've seen with um disatunement or entrainment um mechanisms uh for m for message passing and for mathematical intuition or for this like strike of mathematical intuition.

There are these moments of profound meditation or you have a problem to complete or you have a construction that is not missing. So you have a lot of rules and you you sit with it. you want to resolve it and this creates this attunement uh mechanism every attunement signature for uh what I've computed so far um it is it is a complex construction but these attunement signatures have an index and this index it is fairly well expressed mathematically it does not have uh for Now anything alike uh a physics interpretation directly um but the mechanism would look a little bit like this. So you you would tune these signatures have they are mapped to an index and what you get it's like a request and the what you get back is exactly what you've asked for. So it's signature dependent. uh it is not context dependent but it's scale it's scale appropriate I guess this is and so one of the very interesting patterns are these canonical forms we um I think it was like the first one I was working on it mathematics before Um and there are a lot of models that are fairly successful at at modeling for example foss or speed monostium which are patterns that are it is really hard to model from a physics perspective what is happening um but mathematically it's fairly easy um specifically philosophics um and there so there are two models now two newer models um And one of them had this inductive field um that would work along inh inhibitory pathways or fields if you want because creates waves and there's an equivalent so you can say it's um and and I thought it really interesting to try to make it um b physics based based on pneumatics but of course there is a part that you know one have to resort into a construction that does not have a representation.

Um, but this is this working? Yeah.

I don't know if you can see it that it's moving.

>> We can.

>> Ah, good.

And so I I have there's a lot of um I ran a lot of different scripts to try to approximate and there's a lot of trial and error of course in this pro in this process and there's also a lot of um let's find like the transport problem right like or the transport phenomena uh you can go like on fix law or law this is not the same and then you go and you say no there is a similarity and I'm going to pick the similarity and I'm going to see if I can bundle these things together and if they reckon together if there is a symmetry. So I I really do believe that for example in the transport phenomena that's what it was accomplished. It was like okay this I mean this can be a grand generalization perhaps does not have a lot of utility you know for like you know building a building or a bridge but I do feel that these things are already are are really important. So this is what I've I've done here. Again the construction is fairly complicated. Um but then you know you have a almost I guess what what is mindboggling is to imagine that there is some sort of um parallel you know there is like a a correspondence um between whatever it is that it is our world and hypothetically you know a platonic world that there is this communication and that this communication is um is animated.

Sorry, it's a bit slow.

And so when um in this model they do like it was an inductive field and the inhibitory field um and in principle um you would get like this um forear bezel and you know at the at the zeros you would have they didn't comput it as a signal but I decided to uh make the three construction so you would have um the first the zero one um it was it's like beyond the inductive and then you have the inductive and then you have uh the inhibitory and so it's almost as if there's like a these our poly computational architectures are capable of doing frequ frequency mixing which I think it's fairly more easy than uh you know doing mathematical formalizations and proofs and the way that we do But, you know, this is a a computational way that is slightly simpler. Okay, just checking the time.

Uh, and so, okay, I'm going to be really vague, but I think today I had a little bit of a breakthrough and I'm glad we're going to talk soon. Uh, because I feel that, you know, experimentally I don't think there would be any harm, but if it is right, uh, I think it could do a lot of good.

Um and and it's really cool. Um so we have okay in this if in this context the following is true uh what we formalize mathematics there as mathematically uh there are hints for pattern completion um as m message passing intuitions. Um and thus the following propositions that a direct communication protocol could be seen as a touring test because morphogenetic processes for example they they look very much like pattern completion problems um and and then you also have like pattern theory. So patterns is something that is fairly uber um and they're a little bit like puzzles. Um and I mean if intelligence is going to be intelligence by different means and you know is driven by problem solving uh I feel that if in this case this is true there is this direct communication avenue um and for which we are being proposed consequently to you know solve problems uh which is a test uh and then for this reason I there's another interpretation which is this could also be like a trans diagnosis situation by bias and so u the other day a friend of mine sent me most beautiful letter with this super intelligent alien this was a statistic problem but this super intelligent alien called omega and the idea was to try to see if we could you know reason at the level of a super intelligent um rational agent uh and and and yeah and one of the comments was that the only way to do it uh one way or the other would be to simulate the other to the best of our abilities.

Um but in either case I feel that given the message processing paradigm um and the feedback we can use it to reciprocate.

And again if in this context the following is true uh the third real of forge um if it exists I would pose that it's of a spectral quality uh and in this case poly computers are spectral samplers spectral signatures appropriated scale but scale invariants such as scalers can be mapped to spectral indexes such as addresses to canonical forms. In the Platonic world, um the postulate is that certain mathematical objects are implemented beyond formalism and are rich and they can fly which is here. This is really an analogy but it's also a funny reference and also that they can be in different places at the same time also because of the time constraint.

Okay. And if in this context the following is true, we see the polycomputers are spectral samplers. And so we uh are also polycomputers that can sample other poly computational architectures and thus we can induce specific spectral states for desired developmental outcomes. But other things and the spectral states acts as a request and one gets a reciprocal response.

And if in this context the following is true. Given the scale-free paradigm uh of poly computational architecture, scales are connected by invariance which are constants and their scalers which are indexes and the indexes can be generalized into two main modalities such as proposal. Stability you know that would odd some sort of growth and emergence at a new scale and instability a new order of dissipation.

Um, and okay, I also predict that what we are on to is really close, but it will not explain the universe and the rules are really simple to grasp yet extremely cumbersome, extensively, and laborious to compute. Um, I also think that there's like a lot of findings here, right here. Um, and this is really exciting.

uh and from my experience uh so far is that they require that one looks for a billion affinities in nature and a little bit of courage because they are not found in literature directly um I mean related um and they are counterintuitive after intuition and correspondingly proportional and reciprocal uh the benefits I feel of this approach is that it leaves a lot of freedom and responsibility um because it is up to us to for example complete patterns or reciprocate but also from the perspective that we know that higher patterns in terms of organization like for example climate governments all these things some we create and some we do not create but we know that the hierarchy ends up making the lower um one on subsume and so I feel that the responsibility here is that some patterns they imprint or they ingress and we choose to make mathematical constructions for example with them but there are others that through these mathematical constructions then we build something else and it becomes a lot bigger um and then we kind of lose control um and I feel that the the benefit of looking at it in this context is that yeah we have freedom to choose what we want to construct and what we want formalize and we would want to give attention to and also responsibility in how we do it.

Um and so I leave you with this beautiful thought of Einstein. Um which completely I agree that in the sense in the sense only I belong to the rank of a devoutly religious man. Um and I have a lot of really the writings have become uh truly extense and this and also the the experiments. If you find that this resonated with you out there in the world of the internet, please contact me. Um I would love to hear from you. Um and for now, this is all I have.

Thank you so much for listening.