Título: "Geometry of the mind-body interface" by Tom Froese
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XA3DCTtRpDU
Duración: 37.0 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

Hello, my name is Tom Fro and this is my contribution to the uh Platonic Spaces Symposium. Um let me begin by saying thank you so much to the organizer Mike Leven for convening everybody for this exciting event. Um it's very stimulating and it made me remember that when I was a young PhD student um just starting my PhD I actually impromptu wrote an essay um based on Plato's Republic thinking about the concept of idols and what it means for consciousness and so on. So that was a long time ago. So I'm very happy to to revisit that topic after having made a long long career in uh embody cognition which on the face of it is something quite distinct uh from a platonic style of philosophy. Um but today um I'm going to try to find a way to to weave these strands uh together.

So I have a few slides and let me share uh my presentation.

So here we go. The title of my contribution is uh the geometry of the mind uh body interface and um let me begin. So the work we do in the unit uh uh is is trying to put the uh the best theories of the of the mind um to the experimental uh test and that involves recording a lot of data from the brain and all kinds of um other uh parts of the body and including the environment. Um and one challenge that we face when we do all these uh data recordings is um where is the mind fitting in all of this? Uh where does life fit in all of this? Where does consciousness fit in all of this? Where is agency? Where where's where is the uh intention of the subject um when we record um neural activity for example.

And so being faced with um you know all the raw data coming out of um recording instruments um I realized that we need to have a a strong u methodological framework for allowing um the topics that are more close to the humanities and social sciences like uh subjectivity and agency and consciousness to interface uh productively with the um things that are being observed uh using our best scientific uh equipment. And for that purpose I developed a theory uh called eruption theory. Um so let me briefly introduce the uh main axioms of this uh theory. Um the the background assumption is that non-reductionism is on the right track and I guess this is um at least pointing into the direction of something like um what Plato might have had in mind that um not everything is of the same kind. Um so in this case non-reduction basically just means that we do not want to eliminate the mind and and the efficacy the causality of the mind in favor of um the efficacy of uh other domains. So axum number one says an agent's motivations as such make a difference to the material basis of the agent's behavior. Um and as I said uh one of the issues we face in the uh lab is this uh that we can't directly measure this uh motivational efficacy.

Um and this leads us then to axim 2 of incomplete materiality which means that if we accept the reality of the mind and uh that it makes a difference to behavior for example um then we have this problem that it doesn't show up in the empirical record uh when we go in to measure things. Um that's also something that we can't just brush away and it doesn't help to simply uh impute representation or content or something like that to the things we measure and this is a gap that we have to take seriously.

Um the solution um is suggested by Axum 3 which is to say that um despite what many people believe the uh materiality of the situation does not give us a complete picture um of reality. uh it is inherently underdetermined and this then opens degrees of freedom potentially for motivational efficacy to um play a role uh in in what's happening and and this uh then gives us the um mindbody interface where we have two kinds of operators I propose depending on which direction of influence we we are interested in the first one classically known as mental causation we have something happening in the mind uh which then has consequences in the basis of behavior generation. Um uh and the issue here is that from the point of view of our measuring measuring instruments, we cannot directly see the mental cause. Uh we cannot directly observe it u but we can notice that there are consequences but these are consequences without a measurable cause. Um and so um I call these eruptions. basically um there are things happening in our recordings that are spontaneous or unexpected.

Um then there's the other direction which is that when we trace things from the environment and into the body and into the brain um and then the person says yes I perceive something um it's the the other way around. we have a good recording of the trajectory all the way up until the point the person says I'm experiencing something that's something we cannot directly observe uh with our instrument so we have the reverse situation we have a f a cause that then has a consequence which we cannot observe and so um there's a lack of anstream effect um which uh I call absorption so we can define these operators a little bit more precisely in terms of variability So um the absorption operator can be understood as a spontaneous decrease in variability um a loss of degrees of freedom and it's well already represented in the literature um for example in terms of synchronization of of brain activity um all these different channels could be uh operating independently with independent degrees of freedom um but it's been found that uh during moments of conscious ious awareness when the participant becomes aware of a meaningful visual face in this case um that corresponds to in the brain with a significant increase in large scale neural phase coherence which means that there's a reduction in uh the variability of possible phase relationships uh inside the brain and in this classic study uh by Vera's group in Paris um we can also notice that um there's a a dip and a large dip in face synchrony after the moment of awareness and they don't comment so much about it but this phase scattering um can be associated with the eruption operator uh which is basically a spontaneous increase in variability um and uh um there are more recent works that also look at this operator uh one that gets me quite excited is this work by um Sugar and his group which are reinterpreting the uh long tradition of measuring the readiness potent potential um in the context of the neuroscience of free will. And they basically make the argument that um what's really going on here is that there are stoastic fluctuations in the neural dynamics which eventually cross a threshold and trigger a movement. And so they argue that theorists who want to identify the source of action as the agent will have to tell a story that somehow makes a case for the noisy trigger being part of or attributable to the agent. And so I posit that the eruption operator uh is precisely fulfilling this uh conceptual role.

Um now that we have these two operators um we can do useful work with them. Um to clear up some of the literature um and uh note for example that um often times the uh uh eruption like operator in terms of increased neural entropy or increased complexity has been taken as a signature for increased level of consciousness. Um but there's a clear confound here because um more awareness also invites more interaction or more responsivity. So which is actually the driving factor here. Um and in this study we can see how these things come apart. Um so uh eruption theory would predict that these increases in neural complexity have more to do with um uh increased cognitive load or cognitive effort or cognitive engagement, mental engagement. And so in this case there's a study where people are falling unconscious due to proper fall administration. So uh they're um under anesthesia and they found that yes in most cases the uh neuro complexity goes down uh with high concentrations of propall but in some cases actually their opposite effect happens and there's a above baseline increase uh in uh complexity and they notice that uh this corresponds with people who are still having a high performance. Um and so we can see here that it's the performance which is correlating with the level of uh neural complexity uh assuming that in both cases consciousness is going down.

So that's quite consistent with the eruption theory. And so we have this uh uh overall architecture then uh where we have uh two uh operators um and the blackbox middle here is a crucial piece which basically uh is implied by taking non reductionism seriously. Um and so it's basically saying that the mind body gap the explanatory gap is here to stay. Um it's uh is actually a part of reality. It's a part of nature. We need to basically get comfortable working with this gap. um and we can by basically quantifying uh the uncertainty that it generates in in our measurements. There's more to be said about the mental side of this in terms of phenomenology. What is what is it like um to uh encounter the black box on on the side of our awareness? Uh maybe let me just point to one uh source here. Dan Zahavi has done a lot of nice work relating consciousness and alterity where the um idea is that even in in consciousness we're not totally self-transparent and this inherent opacity of consciousness has to do with its embodiment. So that fits very well uh on that side. But here I'm focusing mainly on the on the material side. And in a more recent version of this diagram uh we've tried to articulate this a little bit more more fine grained. Um and so now it looks like this. We've basically got um a boundary uh separating two domains uh of reality. Um and the uh um the way in which the the the mind side uh shows up in the material side is in terms of changes in embodiment which we can call the embodied mind which are basically informationational dynamics um which have to do with these eruption and absorption uh operators.

And so in the context of the symposium, my proposal is that perhaps some of the forms and patterns and um uh the geometry that looks like it could come from an independent realm um might more have to do with this uh interface, this black box middle. So um and here I take inspiration from uh early Chinese Buddhism where the idea was to uh consolidate the reality um that we experience in our everyday life, conventional reality um and the reality of of Buddha nature or of emptiness. The way to do this is to actually say that all phenomena are both conventional and um u empty and that this uh intersection of the two and the middle all three are real together. And so we can see this um indicated a little bit in the diagram that it has three parts. We've got the top part with the with the consciousness which you might associate with the Buddha nature. We've got the blackbox middle which also has its own reality.

Um and then you have the bottom part the material conventional reality part and basically the blackbox middle um cannot be reduced to either side. It has its own existence. Um and so basically that means um we have to be a little bit careful with how we treat the interactions across this boundary. And I think it's this in this sense when we start taking care about um for example the kind of units that are involved and so on that geometry really comes to shine. Um and it might be a kind of middleway approach to say yes these uh geometrical forms um play a real role.

Um but it it's because they are basically sitting at this interface and not because they are you know populating an independent platonic realm. So let me try to unpack this a little bit more.

um uh if it's the case that uh the the mind is efficacious uh non-reducible um but at the same time uh we can measure some of its consequences as I try to indicate um we have to be careful uh because we cannot express relationships uh with the body if those relationships um are in terms of physical units that don't have equivalent units in the blackbox middle or in the kind and so ideally what we need is uh relationships that are expressed in terms of pure numbers, unitless constant ratios and so forth.

Um this basically comes out of dimension uh dimensionless um analysis. Um so we have to be a bit careful here. Then the other part is that it's likely to be multiplicative. Um because if for some reason uh physical units are involved, the way to combine them into relationships uh it doesn't work uh in terms of addition. So you can't uh add for example uh seconds and meter together, but you could uh have meter per second um and things like that. So uh again just to be sure that um what we're looking for doesn't violate any kind of constraints we probably will see that the most important signatures of the mind at work will be in terms of multiplications and it probably should also be symmetrical. Um this is a bit more loose. I still have to think this about this a little bit more. But when we have these kinds of changes happening um we we need to be careful that we don't have any runaway effects or get into trouble with energy conservation. Um and so one kind of intriguing number that has come up a lot in in my recent work is Oilers's E which is special in many ways. Um but one reason why it's special is that it's the only number whose rate of change is equal to itself. um and so it is one way in which to get from um a rate uh to a quantity. So it's a kind of conversion um number in a way.

So um this then gives us a distinctive experimental signature to to look for that in a sense uh is the same as a mathematical interface. Um and there's different uh options that we can discuss. Um for for eruption we're looking for something that is uh related to intrinsic indeterminacy.

Um and maybe something as simple as a proonome process could be useful here.

Whereas for absorption uh one of the things that seems quite uh fitting would be that of a broken discrete uh symmetry um where like basically the uh system loses a degree of freedom um and and therefore becomes more more redundant in in in a way. Um one other thing to notice is that these different uh operators exclude each other. So you can't really have um uh eruption and absorption occurring at the same time and place. So either they must be separated in place um or in time which would then generate a kind of rhythmicity um which is interesting because indeed as we know the body is full of uh rhythms and and modularity.

So let me show you a few preliminary uh uh pieces of data coming from our group that speak to these topics. Um let's assume a very simple pson uh process where uh the rate of these random events happening uh is set to e which is this you know special number which means that if you have a total time horizon of one.

So we basically take the ratio um of of time rather than absolute time then uh if we have one divided by e we will have an average had one uh event. And if you set things up like this, we get a very nice uh distribution which is the bottom panel where we can look at the likelihood of having had no events which is the P 0 distribution. And then we can also have the likelihood of having at least one event which is the P1 distribution. And they cross at this magical point where um the timing is one of E of the total time horizon and the probability also is one of E. And it's it's the point where uh there's a transition from um having uh more likelihood of having no event to more likelihood of having had one event. And this will come up in in the data I will show. Um but there's another reason why I set it up like this that is because this moment in time the one divided by e uh is very famous uh for another reason and that comes from optimal decisionm and particular the secretary problem.

sometimes also known as the 37% rule because 1 divided by e roughly is uh 37%.

Um in which under sequential uh decision making uh uh situations where you don't know in advance what the um the values are going to be what the distribution is going to be and you basically have to figure out what's your best candidate for action.

Um the ideal situation is to wait some time to build up knowledge of the distribution of of the of the candidates. Uh and then once you have enough knowledge and there's a diminishing returns of waiting longer, you switch modes and say I'm going to select the best next best opportunity that comes along. And this transition point uh which is basically a transition from exploration to exploitation can be shown to be uh exactly at 1 / e. uh I'm not going to go through all the derivation here but basically we've got in the the middle panel uh showing us that for different uh waiting times the maximum uh probability for success happens to be at one divided by e. So the bottom panel basically then says your uh best strategy is to actually wait if you can until one divided by e and only then uh commit to uh taking the next best uh candidate.

All right. So in a way what I'm trying to say here is that you know if eruptions work like um you know stoastic events they're brief bursts of indeterminacy then the body has to be prepared to register these events and to act appropriately and then the best way it can do this is by setting these kinds of uh um time uh windows in which it basically listens for um the background level of activity and then switches modes and see if there's any outliers.

Um and then those are probably uh likely eruption events that require some kind of action. So does this help us analyze our data? Um this is a data set we originally recorded to actually investigate the neural basis of uh social awareness um shared interubjectivity.

Um but it lends itself uh also for this.

So people were interacting through a virtual interface and their task was to give us a click when they thought that they were interacting with their partner. Um and so it's basically um the task is to uh through this interface distinguish between haptic feedback and socially mediated uh feedback. Um and it gives us this kind of um time series. At the top we see positions changing uh over time. So we're just unrolling this uh circular space. Um and then the second line we have speeds and we have sensor states um when they get activated and their the haptic feedback. we get the button press. Um, and we can see that the um, uh, the pink player or the red player got it right. He was clicking just at the moment when the bear interacting whereas the blue player got confused and uh, while the red player was already gone, clicked while he was hanging around on this uh, static object. And also at the bottom to just to give you an indication. So we're recording all these uh physiology um states and in this case it's the breathing activity where we can see there's an interesting uh entrainment uh with one person uh in breathing two times with the other person just breathing one time. All right. So in terms of the clicking times then if this is on the right track and um the way in which the the mindbody interface works is according to this principle of um uh random events which then need to be detected in this kind of uh one over e optimal way. Um what does the click response actually look like? And so very encouragingly if we look at the counts of clicks occurring through the 60 um seconds of a trial the uh probability density function peaks just after the total time horizon divided by e. So we got we get a very nice um peak here. Um and we also see that there are some interesting oscillations uh of a kind of 10-second uh rhythm which we'll we'll get back to but this is already encouraging. So how is it that people actually manage to organize themselves uh such that they uh peak with the pick uh respond they click with a maximum likelihood just after the optimal waiting time.

Well uh we can look at the sensory activation and this is the average haptic feedback. So whether the um the the vibration that they were perceiving was on or off at each moment in time of the trial. I'm um normalizing this here with respect to the total time horizon of one. And then what we see is that the uh uh activation um uh goes up very fast and then approximates a kind of asmtote and interesting enough this can be described very neatly uh with this model here um which is just an exponential increase to this asmtote. But the the the two uh parameters of this um a and k uh are the two um halves of the uh secretary problem. So we've got a being 1 / e and the other one 1 minus 1 divid e which is basically exactly the proportions of this trial. So we've got 1 / e here and this dotted line and the rest then will be 1 minus 1 / e. So this is already pretty amazing that uh uh these the participants self-organize the average amount of stimulation that they receive uh with respect to the ratios um of the uh trial time and there's a few oscillations again in the 10 uh second regime which we will go come back to later. Um the movement also interesting is mostly homogeneous across the in trial time. Um and we get in this case uh something that looks a little bit like e / 10 which might suggest that again 10 is another interesting time unit here. Um and we will get back to that. Here's a slide that I don't know how to to handle it. So maybe one of our viewers can can let me know what's going on here. Um I'm just plotting the uh the log log uh of uh the movement durations.

So we've got movement durations in milliseconds at the in the x-axis here and the frequency on the y- axis and it's this astonishingly uh uh straight um power law distribution across uh you know quite a considerable number uh orders of magnitudes and the surprisingly the the the slope is pretty much exactly e um and I'm not sure exactly what what the situation here is as I said e E is usually um the unique that is the point where quantity and rate of change are identical as shown here but the formula for a power law is a little bit different. So there is some relationship with a rate of change percolating across scales but I'm not quite sure um how how to fit these two pieces together. So we we're interested to hear if anybody has any ideas.

Now for one of the core pieces of of evidence, what's happening in the brain um of the people while they're in in this situation. So here again I normalize the 60 seconds uh to to one.

So this is our total time horizon. I'm plotting the optimal transition point uh of 1 divided by e in this dotted line.

Um and then I normalized our skull potential um by uh um taking the first point as zero and I'm putting the largest point as uh 1 / e. And when I do that the uh overall global skull potential so I'm here just doing an averaging there's no pre-processing. I'm taking the raw data and saying average over all channels over all trials over all participants giving us over a thousand trials. when we do that uh it's following uh what looks like the proson P1 curve with lambda equals to E which is what I had shown you in the simple model before and there is some oscillation sitting on top of this it looks like we have a 20 second ovelation uh oscillation here followed by uh 10-second uh oscillations later on and we'll get back to that but it's quite amazing I think the this is the first time I've seen something like this that just purely averaging over all channels all trials gets I see something that appro is quite well approximated by a pson curve um of the first event transition with a rate E. Now one worry could be that uh this is just uh maybe the tension of of the body um and indeed there's one uh signature that that corresponds to this. This is the uh normalized average um arbitrary respiration unit. I'm I'm fli flipping the y-axis here um to make this make this fit. And again I just said um let me take the first one to be zero and the largest number to be 1 divided by e. If I do that um again we get this very beautiful fit to uh a P1 curve. Um and the way to read this is that basically um people are uh compressing their lungs. They're not inhaling as much until they hit this optimal point and then they start relaxing and they're starting to inhale more again. And again we can basically map this beautifully to this um uh you know geometric arrangement that this is one divided by E and this is one divided by E and gives us the point of inflection um of the tension of the respiratory activity.

Now if that's what happening with the brain it would not be so interesting. Um but that's not the full story because when we look at the electromal activity we see a different curve. Um this is the uh electrogermal activity again with respect to a total time horizon of one um normalized and if we normalize it again we find that um at um the transition point of 1 / e if I plot the uh curve here we get exactly 1 divided by e at this point and that is just the um uh p 0 curve so the survival curve or hazard curve curve the likelihood of having had no event. So this is like one of the most simplest curves to plot. As you can see, here's the formula e to the negative of lambda* r. Um and in our case, lambda is just e. So we've got this very simple formula describing the average decay of arousal of the body.

And in a way what this tells us is that potentially the arousal the electromal uh activity gives um uh the rate at which all these other processes are happening. Um so that that would be interesting because one challenge we have to explain like one difficulty we have and that need still needs to be explained is how does the body know from starting at zero what will be the total time of horizon right so um potentially the arousal level you know allows that.

So if you set yourself up at a certain arousal level and then let it decay down such that it hits the spot at the end of the time window um uh in the right way then basically all the other processes can use this decay rate in order to optimize their relative timing.

So all of this is already very promising but um the question is does it actually speak to the mind body interface. So um let's then now switch to the other side of the the interface the other side of this um blackbox boundary and see what the participants actually experienced uh during the trial times. Here we have a figure um of across the 60 seconds of a tile of a trial. We've got over a thousand ratings of perceptual awareness. How clear people experience things. We got four options. Clear awareness almost clear awareness that it was ambiguous or that they had no no experience. And we can see that the highest ratings come from before um the optimal uh waiting time which is expected because that's the initial phase that's the initial sample the observation phase whereas later on it's about the selection it's about the action. So um we get the highest clarity in the moment when it's uh expected but then we still have this decrease and and there's an interesting uh story to be told here which goes back to the point about the global scal potential because um overlaying here just the um the global scalp potential and you can see it has this kind of like 10-second oscillation and also the lowass the low clarity ratings have a similar uh uh distribution whereas we don't see that for the high clarity ratings. So something about the low clarity ratings has to do with the oscillations, the 10-second oscillations that start occurring after the optimal waiting time. And just as a kind of first pass model, um what I what I was thinking about is that the initial skull potential could be modeled as this um uh negative sine wave. Um and um then what happen? So it's this one here. There's the equation. And then what happens is that we've got like a doubling uh after the optimal time uh waiting time has passed which is basically saying that we've got um a squaring effect of this which then translates into a shifted uh cosine function with a frequency doubling. So one way of of thinking about this is well it goes either way.

So either we can say that the initial phase is absorption dominant as we as expected which basically means one of the sign terms is not expressed or alternatively what we can say is that this is the baseline and what happens during the eruption dominant phase is that we get an extra variability introduced and the consequences will be the same. Um but yeah, so it's it's quite fascinating that we've we've got such a clean um uh frequency doubling uh uh bifurcation happening at just the optimal waiting time.

And then here's the uh um perceptual awarenu ratings again. Right? So uh as I said we've got a kind of frequency doubling event. And then when we look at the different ratings and uh normalize them for how much time is in each section remember one divid e and the other one is 1 minus 1 divided by e.

when I when I basically um adjust the rate of rating of people rating to that time we find that for the high clarity ratings there's almost no difference in terms of the the rate at which people reported but for the low uh ratings is a doubling right so here we have um 1.9 or two so basically this doubling effect here corresponds with a doubling of low clarity perceptual reports which corresponds very nicely with what I said that the eruption and absorption are actually interfering with each other. They can't u both be u uh expressed. So this is nice confirmation that we're really working here at the mind body interface and picking up the right signatures. Um just a couple of final remarks and then then I'll close.

Um one other aspect that could deserve a little bit of a closer look is the actual frequency uh bands of the EEG. I was just looking at the low frequency end here. But if we think about the historical frequency bands that have come out of empirical work. Um what an interesting point is that the alpha band seems to be a very good pacemaker. It's one of the stless oscillations.

And then we got these two faster bands, the beta band and the gamma band with the beta often associated with selection and and motor stuff and and cognition cognition and so on. and the gamma band often associated with uh perceptual awareness and consciousness and things like that. And if we put these things together, if you look at these um ranges, what we can actually do is to think that in the alpha band, we can fit the gamma and the beta in terms of the optimal waiting time ratio. So basically if you take the duration of the alpha band um of a roughly 100 milliseconds or here we have is actually so 125 mill divided by e uh gives us basically this cutff boundary um between uh beta um and and gamma. So that's nice. Um this would be a way of maybe deriving the frequency bands uh based on first principle from these kind of like geometric um considerations. And one more aspect that came off out of our data has to do with the heart. Um this was a kind of coincidental finding. Um but uh in the heart we've got this u very complicated architecture um that unfolds over time.

Um but one important aspect of this um and and so I should say the only thing that we're recording is the electroc cardiogram which is this signal here.

But in terms of the whole body, what happens is that there's a phase here in the systolic phase where uh there's pressure blood pressure pump through the whole body and then there's a rest phase. And what's interesting is that the the ratio of this entire cycle with respect to the blood pumping ratio um gives us something that's close to to what we're looking for. Um and so what we what I did was to say okay what if we look at the ratio of our peaks the R peaks with respect to the um end of the T peaks here. So this interval where blood pressure pumps through the body with respect to the RR intervals. And so here's the the result where I'm basically asking uh about this ratio the ratio of the blood pressure to the total cardiac cycle. And it interestingly what happens is that it arranges itself during trial time to hit exactly uh the one divided by uh E boundary.

And so um that's pretty amazing. It means that the uh wave of fresh blood flowing through the body um basically primes the entire body uh to have this uh optimal timing window between uh being sensitive to to uh um observation and then switching to a action mode. Um so putting it all together uh the overall take-home message I want to convey is that the geometric operations are the signature of the mind body interface in the surface of multiscale alignment. And I propose that this is a potentially an alternative way of thinking about the role that these apparently platonic forms play um in in embodiment. And with that um thank you for your attention. And now let me conclude the uh recording.