Título: "Maths Justifies Metaphysics in Biology" by Denis Noble
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mMpPiAJJGfo
Duración: 21.6 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

Thank you very much um for this opportunity and let me start by saying that 65 years ago when I was a young student at University College London I would have never have dared to give a talk with this title but even more I would have thought it would be deeply wrong to do so. So this is very much um a jump into the blue back of beyond I think because the standard view widespread within biology is very different. I'm always reminded how way back in 1976 when Richard Dawkins joined a debate that I arranged in Oxford about his book in the presence of two philosophers Tony Kenny and Charles Taylor both of them very distinguished philosophers he responded to Tony qu Tony's question as a philosopher to him well I'm not a philosopher I'm just a scientist I'm only interested in truth truth. Well, that was that. Um, Jerry Coin of course reflects this in his book um and in his later work uh particularly in 2014 when he said of the illusion of free action agency. It's so powerful but we have no choice in this matter. We it doesn't exist. It's a great big illusion that evolution has presented to us. I could go on. It's all on the slides. the various people who have given um no no option at all for metaphysics being a part of uh biology.

And yet, you see, as I shall show later in this talk, all of that led to measuring association scores and ignoring or misinterpreting causation in genomes and their relationship to biology. And the shocking outcome of that is the 2023 study by Hindorani and his colleagues showing polygenic risk scores performed poorly in population screening uh and so on. Strong claims about the effect of polygenic risk scores on health care seem to be disproportionate.

Um I I come to conclusion that theories of causation are necessary. Science is certainly not just association scores that has led us to the uh shocking outcome and I think that automatically involves metaphysical parameters in the mathematics involved. Now why? Well, I go back to 1960 as a research student at University College London where I was taught a very sudden introduction to the question of imaginary numbers by none other than Andrew Huxley. Because I had worked as a student to build a model of the heart based on the Hodkin Huxley theory of nerve excitation. And of course, cardiac cells have well different kinds of electrical activity, but they have electrical activity that depends in the same kind of way on the interaction between surface membrane voltage changes and the proteins within the um cells concerned and that leads to a very important property. There are thresholds both ways for both exciting the nerve or muscle to generate depolarization or for repolarizing it too. Both predict there would be thresholds for those processes.

But two Australian scientists in 1961 just after I published the first model showed that this process is absent because they did a very clever experiment. They pushed two microelerodes stuck together deep into the ventricular muscle of a heart start to polarize with one electrode and record from the same cell with the other one. And what they showed is that such thresholds, such unusual nonlinear behavior, um a runaway process once you go beyond the threshold is not only modified, it doesn't exist at all.

I was deeply shocked, so convinced I was that the Hodkin Huxley process was the correct one to um uh to use. And then I was reminded of some math lectures that I'd been attending in order to use the computer incidentally that it required what are called vessel functions.

So I was programming one of the earliest valve computers, a mercury computer program that I was using. I put functions in to try to reproduce what they had found. But all I got was unwanted oscillations.

And what you see on the screen here is an example of that, a plot of bessel functions of the first kind, meaning uh of um standard numbers not including imaginary numbers. Well, I then went to the great Andrew Huxley. He had just moved to University College from Cambridge. frustrated. I showed my results to him and he said it very quickly. Dennis, he's obviously very upset with me. You need a vessel function of an imaginary argument.

Imaginary.

I had absolutely not the foggiest notion what that could be. But I tried it and it worked. And what you see here is the evidence that it works. Um the top diagram there is what the situation would be if you polarized the heart membrane uniformly everywhere. And you see there are thresholds for the relation between current and voltage. If you go to a cable property um you begin to get to the point where sometimes the thresholds disappear but they're still there.

But as soon as you go to point polarization of a sheet membrane, the thresholds completely disappear. I was shocked by this result too, but it's true. Why? Uh because um well, first of all, you have to explain the metaphysics here. The square root of minus one of course does not exist. No one has ever seen an imaginary number of apples.

But what this taught me although I didn't understand the metaphysics aspects of this at that time is that actually the concept in this case of a non-existent object is of widespread utility in mathematics. Oiler, Couchi, Gaus and many others of course have used it. And the reason is what you find when you get the right kind of vessel function, the one using imaginary arguments, you get as you can see on the left there, uh a decay of the point polarization.

Um the point is right there at the zero point on the uh on the axis. the um voltage the voltage over the distance axis what happens is that it decays exceedingly steeply so virtually nothing is polarized it's remarkable and I was very surprised by this but it's what got me out of that particular difficulty now I want to go back to the point I made at the beginning of the talk the lessons from what I call the gentric ampass because the failure of genomics ics to lead to the promised cures for complex diseases actually depends on a total reliance on association itself being adequate. And the met metaphysical problem here is that association scores cannot reliably identify causation. And the reason for that is that causation is a metaphysical concept that requires a hypothesis that can be modified sorry it can be modeled to proceed then by reverse engineering to identify the causation. If you don't do that there's no way to avoid only having association scores.

In fact, Yanayan Lurcher in 2020 even wrote um an article in genome biology with the title a hypothesis is a liability. So we shouldn't even have hypothesis.

Well I can tell you from my own work if I had not developed hypothesis to explain the rhythm mechanism of the heart I would never have got there.

Now the strange thing is in all of this that as a student in those days way back in the 1960s and then for probably about 20 years subsequently I actually thought the metaphysics was a load of old nonsense. Um I had obviously not fully understood how deeply when a scientist generates a theory further than the direct observations that he can make um he's actually moving outside the range of pure observation.

Anyway, um genomics uh in its failure now to lead to the cures that we were all expecting is I'm afraid the ultimate outcome of the view of people like Yanai and Lurcher. It's only when one factor, a gene, is the sole and sufficient cause of a phenotype that you get what are called the monogenetic diseases, but they affect only 5% of the human population. very important 5% but still it is only that.

So what's the the state of affairs for all the others affecting 95% of humanity? Well, they're strongly polygenic. Schizophrenia now has around 160 gene association scores associated with it. Cancers over 291.

Cardiovascular disease is even more 735 at the last count. Alzheimer's disease 75. Um, you need to have a theory to interpret all of those associations. You cannot rely just on the association score. And I've recently published books and articles showing how causation can be measured. That book, The Pacemaker Channels of the Heart, has only just come out. In fact, on Amazon United States, it's still not available. The books are still on the way over from Singapore where it was printed. Um, it is available in uh, Amazon UK already and is selling very well. I then wrote an article with Peter Hunter in 2020 to show how one could link genomics to physiology through epigenomics. That was an editorial in the journal epigenomics.

And uh I then wrote an article for the journal of physiology, the cardiac pacemakers, a paradigm of robustness in evolutionary biology. Uh and that's all uh referred to in the book too. The method is very simple. You first create an experimentally based that's the key must be detailed experimental information on the various molecular level and subcellular level processes involved. You create an experimentally based model that includes gene products such as channels, enzymes and so on. And then you check first that the association scores in the model reproduce what you see in genomic studies. GW was shows that most of those association scores are very low. And if that is the correlation, you can then reverse engineer within the model to find the causation.

Um the example I gave in the journal of physiology article is of the heart where four different polygenic inputs there are four of them that any one of which can be sufficient to enable the intensely complex functional networks involving thousands of gene products to enable cardiac rhythm to occur. You can knock any one of those out and the others will keep it going. That's the essence of it. There's huge robustness which means that association scores hide massive causation. That's the difference between association and causation. In the case of the heart, it can be the difference between a 15% association and an 80% causation. The full details of that are in the new book.

Well, this all arises from a very important property of voltage and fields, electrical fields in cells and other tissues and organs of the body. These were originally called Hodkin cycles. Um, and in a way it's a general principle of what I call relativity in biology. In the same way that Einstein's theory of general relativity is a a theory about causation in spaceime in the universe. The existence of masses distorts spaceime which in turn changes the movement of the masses within spacetime and of course of light. Um I've just extended it to the principle of biological relativity.

So what is it? Well, it's very simply that there's a necessary two-way interaction between the molecular events, opening and closing of protein channels in the membranes and a field property dependent, of course, on an integrative outcome of those molecular level changes. And it's huge 10 million volts per meter because the membrane the thin the thin uh lipid membrane is that that that thin and in the integration procedures that we all have to use in order to solve our models having created a dynamic model each that is a boundary condition for each of the steps. It's therefore a causation throughout the process of integration.

I see the Hodgkin cycle as therefore one of the major foundations of the theory of rel relativity of biological relativity and its application to biology. And I see connections here with eastern thinking.

The Dowist and Buddhist condition arising is that nothing exists in and of itself. All existence depends on two-way interaction. In one sense, this is absolutely obvious. You cannot make an observation if what you're trying to observe does not interact in some way with what you can observe. Whether it's light in your eye or a feeling of an electric field or um in the case of detecting neutrons deep in great big tanks of water in the earth, the very occasional interaction between a neutron and those atoms.

But it's not only an important principle.

It also applies to DNA in a very particular sense because I think a gene as a DNA sequence is just such a no self that is that it depends upon its interactions because it's only functional as a DNA sequence and this is a molecular biological point by being read as a sequence by the organism. The DNA itself is passive. It's not an efficient cause to use that difference introduced by Aristotle way back two and a half or however many thousands of years it is ago. Um as as a passive molecule it is in practice therefore just another chemical.

Now I come to how one represents all of this and I refer in this slide I think it's nearly my last one um to two articles that have as it were stolen the idea from um mathematics using imaginary numbers because what we do there is to represent the imaginary numbers as being orthogonal to the real numbers. you you plot them on a two-dimensional uh representation so that they are orthogonal.

Um the problem that we wanted to attack this is my brother and I um Raymond Noble also a physiologist and George Ellis a cosmologist and mathematician in South Africa who's collaborated with me on interpreting the principle of biological relativity. What we've done here is to say that in a similar way one can represent all the non-material factors uh the social interactions of organisms as being orthogonal to the physical processes that occur in them. The details of that are in those articles.

the one published in the journal for the general philosophy of science um actually tries to give a physiological process by which non-material factors like reasons and values can influence what we do. Um and the article with uh George Ellis biological relativity revisited um also does the same thing.

My justification here is that just like the square root of minus1 they have in a sense no existence. They are not objects. They are our values are not objects that you can identify. Um they are processes that influence what it is that we do. Um so relevant publications the pacemaker channels of the heart the book's just come out that has the um detailed arguments about how to identify causation over and above association.

Understanding living systems is a very simple um book published by CUP um just two years ago with my brother Raymond Noble and that um put some of these ideas into more simple language um and not using much mathematics while the original statement of biological relativity was in dance to the tune of life um published in 2016. So, thank you very much. I've stuck my head out on a process I would never have imagined uh certainly not 60 years ago, possibly not even 30 years ago that I would ever do.

But here we are. I think we have to admit both that there is a need for metaphysics in some of the understandings that we try to create.

modeling, if you like, of the processes that give an insight into causation in biology. And if we don't give an insight into causation, we will never solve diseases. That's one thing that I've learned after teaching medical students for very many decades. Um, if you don't know the cause of a disease, you won't have much chance trying to find its cure. Thank you very much indeed. And I'm very much open now to questions. And I'll stop sharing.