Título: "The Emergence of Convergence in Different Levels of Biology and AI" by Brian Cheung
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J-ifBlxbW-8
Duración: 61.6 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

Thank you. Yeah, thank you for the invitation. This symposium is amazing.

I've been going to so many of the talks.

They've been very exciting. So hopefully I can help contribute to this with the the last talk. So my talk begins with this idea of the emergence of certain things happening and a lot of my research focus on kind of emergence in general. So in this case, I think this talk will focus on the notion of the emergence of convergent representations especially across biology and AI. And to begin I want to thank all my amazing co-authors for making this possible. So all these authors have been very critical in making this work possible.

So I first and foremost wanted to thank all the people involved in this work and also obviously the organizations I've been a part of and also the various places I've received funding from and I'd really like to thank you know everyone that was part of this work.

This was you know a big group effort. So on that note let me split my talk into three separate parts. The first part I want to go over is this notion of observing convergence across many forms of intelligence.

And furthermore, after you observe the convergence, I want to talk about controlling convergence to explain, you know, aspects of biology. In this case, maybe various aspects of certain properties of neuroscience. And finally, I want to want to get into more of a philosophical realm and give you a flavor of what optimizing for convergence might mean for the future.

So to begin a lot of my work focuses on representational similarities and one of those focuses on this notion of representational similarities between brains and machines. So the idea in this framework is that you have a brain, it generates representations via neural recordings and you have let's say a vision model also generates representations given an image, right?

So you could show the brain and also a vision model the same image record the representations they produce and compare the representations. And this is a big part of this notion of representational comparisons that we do. I'll explain what these matrix patterns mean later, but just from visual inspection, they look pretty similar, right?

But what we found was that it wasn't just like one particular vision model that actually generated a kernel or this pattern that looked very similar. It was basically any vision model that was really good at, you know, imageet vision was able to generate a pattern that was strikingly similar to the brain.

And I'd like to kind of pose this notion of the comparisons as a representational touring test. The idea being that if you are a neuroscientist and you want to compare the representational pattern you see on the left generated by a vision model with the representational pattern on the right generated by an actual brain, could you tell the two apart?

Could you tell whether you're getting representation from a brain or maybe from another artificial model?

And the idea here is that this representational turning test gives us a sanity check of whether our actual measurements of similarity are actually telling us what we want to tell us.

And now that pattern I showed you before, this is what we call a kernel. The idea is that this kernel is generated via a vector embedding given an input from a function that goes from x which is some domain to some vector space Rn. A kernel is simply the inner product between pair-wise uh embeddings of different inputs. So for example, if you had a vision model and you showed that vision model an apple and you compared the inner product with the vector embedding of an orange, it might have a high value in that kernel position. Furthermore, you would imagine that potentially a vision model might think that an orange and elephant aren't very similar to each other and in that position of the matrix, they'd have a very low value.

So our goal is to see if models measure similarity in similar ways by comparing the kernels. So those kernels I showed you before can be generated by a vision model and also be generated by an alternate model as well. And the idea is that when you compare the similarities of those two together, you're seeing if the kernels are similar to each other.

And if they are similar to each other, we believe that they measure representations geometrically in a similar way.

So going back to this representational turning test, you can think of this aspect, the idea being that you have a mystery model here by the question mark and you want to see which model is the most similar to the brain, right?

So the design would be you have all these different candidate models you know residual networks vision transformers recurrent networks and so on and so forth. And the idea is that if among one of your candidates the brain was actually there, could you tell it apart? Meaning that could you tell apart for example these artificial models from this biological model if you were to compare the representations and the idea being that since we don't know what the actual brain architecture is, we can replace the brain with another architecture that's known for example a known fvision architecture. And the idea is that can your methodology tell apart these two models or make define whether you have the F vision model or any other model as well. So this idea is that can you discriminate between these four different models and ideally you'd want to get the vision model to be the one that you choose given their presentation should be most similar there. Right? So the idea is that let's say we want to compare two motifs that are very dominant in computer vision. There's the convolution motif which has been historically very good at vision and then the attention motif which is more recent which has also shown itself to be very good at a very wide range of problems including vision.

Now let's begin with an example. So VG13 is a type of competent. It came out in around 2013 and it has various layers.

So the x-axis here is going from lower layers of vG13 which is a vision model and it goes to higher layers as you go to the right. And the idea is that if you were to measure other models similarity to VGG13 based on their kernels, would the connets that are in the space of convolutional architectures be more similar to VG-13 than attention models? So you would expect for example that the connets would have more similarity which is given by the y-axis here being higher than the attention models and you would expect this to be consistent across all layers, right?

Now what we actually observe is this data which is not too bad. You can see that most of the layers of VG13 the convolution network is actually more similar to VG13 which is what we want.

The architecture that VG13 is is more similar to the family of models that have convolutional structure in them.

Now this unhappy face is just one particular layer layer 8 where the overlap is high enough where there isn't a substantial p value to tell apart those two networks. So for VG13 now let's go to other architectures right let's say ResNet 18 or ResNet 34 which is a more recent architecture you can see that the overlap is actually a lot more substantial and this is kind of an issue right because that means that the attention models and the convolution models are kind of harder and harder to tell apart from each other and if you go to even more recent architectures you see that the situation gets even worse meaning that the overlap between convolution architectures representations and vision transform representations is increasing and overlap more and more based on the similarity metric I described to you earlier So this led us to the following question. Do different models represent the world in different ways or are they all somehow becoming alike?

And to do that I told you before what the kernels are right now let's say if we measure kernels where we have a vision model here in one domain and we have a paired data set with text kernels in the other domain. The idea being that you have for example this image of an apple with corresponding label or semantic label of an apple. Could you measure the kernels of two different modalities and measure the similarity between two different models and different modalities?

Now let's have a data set that you know before I started giving you these emoji toy examples but now let's go to an actual data set. In this case we took you know images from Wikipedia and this is the Wikipedia and text data set. So the idea being that you can take the images from Wikipedia, embed them into a vision model that creates representation Z and then you can also embed the text representations of the corresponding captions of those images found in Wikipedia through a text model and that creates you know Z text as the embedding representation. And now you can do the kernel machinery I showed you before to compare the representations.

Now there are two possible hypotheses you might have in this space. And let me explain. So on the x-axis here is language model performance. So this measures how well a language model is at being a language model. You know predicting the next token for example.

So it's how well the model models language. And you can measure now for each different performance category of a language model how well that language model will align to a vision model. So the y- axis is the alignment to a vision model. And one hypothesis you might expect is that better language models are simply better at language. they simply are just language models and there's no you know correspondence potentially between you know language language is just its own domain separate from vision. Now the other hypothesis could be that better language models are actually in some sense better vision models and this is what we actually see in our results. So this is alignment to a particular vision model called Dinov2 which is a self-supervised vision model.

So there's no semantic data in this model and the x-axis is language model performance as I showed you before. So this is measured in you know bits per bite you know language model performance and this is what we see for Dinov2 small what we see is that as language models go from 560 million parameters to 65 billion parameters the alignment increases. So as a language model gets better at language it becomes more aligned to the Dinov2 model which is a vision model. Now this is just for language. What about for larger more performant vision models as well? What we see is that as you go from the smaller vision model to the larger ones, the alignment simply shifts upwards.

Meaning the correspondence is also true for vision as well. As better as models get better at vision, they also become more aligned to language models.

Now that was, you know, what we measured. What happens in the future?

For example, does this alignment continue to go up as we kind of improve our language model performance? Or maybe it saturates or maybe it just plummets.

But I think there's some optimism that it doesn't plummet because there's a large space of work that has shown similar results in supporting our hypothesis. There's works obviously in neuroscience showing that representational similarity across different you know areas of the vententral stream align more and more to our artificial models. And also there are all these emergence properties that we've seen of simple cells encoding things that are purely trained on vision patches or image patches that learn very similar things to V1.

So you might be asking, well why is this happening?

Now you could imagine it's all about the data, right? There's only one internet in the world. And the idea being that because they're all training on the internet, there is just one data set that they're all training on. But the thing is I showed you a line between vision and language. Those are not the same data sets. Those are distinctly different domains, right? So it can't be about the data. You might be asking, well, it's all about transformers.

Transformers is the dominant architecture. You know, there's vision transformers. There's obviously language model transformers, but what we show in our paper is that there's other architectures that also of different, you know, backgrounds and lineages and structures that also show this convergence representation and trending towards convergence. So, it can't just be about the architecture. So, what do we think it's all about? Well, we think it's about the world and is that we're kind of invoking Plato's, you know, allegory of the cave, meaning that there are these prisoners chained to a cave wall and their only interaction with the outside world is these projections of these shadows. But the point is is that there is a world out there and that world has causal features and the idea being that those projections are caused by the same causal properties of the actual world.

So if you have this causal representation, let's say in this representation Z, it gets projected in many different domains, right? For example, it can be projected into a 2D image and be also projected into some semantic description of that image or potentially uh semantically described in a different way, maybe by touch. But the idea is that as they embed those two different uh domains into representations, they should become more aligned because they c they come from the same causal process. And this is what we call the platonic representation hypothesis. Different neural networks are converging towards the same way of representing the world or in our case the same kernel.

Now you might be asking what controls this notion of alignment, right? I just showed you that better language model performance improves alignment, right?

But what about the description? What if you changed how the model is desri or how the image is described? The idea being here, let's say you describe the image with five words, you know, 10 words, 20 words, and maybe even 30 words. You can see that as you go to these longer and longer captions, the detail gets more uh increases, right?

So, the idea being that first there's um escalators indoor mall, then the 10-word caption would have um escalators in a lush indoor mall with greenery and polished tiles. And as you get longer and longer captions, you get more and more description that describes details of the image. What we find is that if you fix the models, but you actually increase the caption size, you see the alignment also increases. Meaning that as you describe the image more via having a longer caption embedding that, that increases the alignment to the vision model.

So that's pretty intuitive, right? And this has also been shown different other modalities. For example, in video. So there was recent work from Princeton showing that if you were to compare the representations of a video model and a caption model, you'll see that as you increase the number of captions of that video, that increases alignment.

And also furthermore, if you give the video model more frames of the video, that increases alignment to the text model, which also has, you know, representation that it can be measured with alignment with.

Now, what I showed you before is probing what language models know, right? And that was probing it via embedding text.

The idea being that you have a caption, for example, a Wikipedia caption called Sunset Over Glacier Point, and you embed that into text. That's one way of probing what language models know. But I argue that that might be just the tip of the iceberg. Maybe you can probe what language models know more by generating text. And let me describe what that means. Let's say you're a user and you ask a language model something. Well, the language model to be useful will generate some response, right? So, it generates text and the idea is that now you can embed that text and create a representation around that which is different from just embedding the text by itself. Right?

Now, the model's arguably influencing the representation more by the model creating something or generating something rather than the text itself.

The idea being that when you're embedding text, the influence of the representation is driven by the text.

Whereas if you're generating text, a lot more influence is participated by the model itself now because it's recurrently processing that text and generating more tokens. Right? So this is kind of distinction between embedding text and generating text now.

I want to take aside here and I want to take a a notion here of why we are doing this and I think like this kind of follows a notion of a quote that arguably maybe it's cringey now but you know it's from the co of AI Sam Alman which said you can just do things and the idea behind that quote was just a moment of I would argue optimism of saying that we're seeing so many changes happen in the world people should just try things and I think with language models I'd like to say that maybe people can do something even lower activation energy which is just ask for things and that's what we do in this experiment. We ask language models for things to see what happens. And I think I should encourage people to try more things in this space because the cost of asking is so marginally low and effortless that you should just try things and maybe you'll get something interesting coming out of them. Maybe it'll be wrong most of the time, but sometimes it'll be interesting. And this is how you know ideas like for example chain of thought prompting happen. So, if people aren't familiar with chain of thought prompting, it's the idea that if you were to try to answer a math question, for example, this is a math question. A juggler can juggle 16 balls, half the balls are golf balls, and half the golf balls are blue. How many golf balls are there? It'll answer incorrectly. But if you ask the language model to simply just think step by step, it actually does that and has a higher chance of getting the answer correct. In this case, it works through the problem step by step before answering the question and gives you an response.

Right? So that is chain of thought prompting. But what if you ask the language model to do something kind of a little bit different? What if you just ask the language model to imagine something? Again, this is just a language model. It has seen no vision data. It has no vision sense. It's just a pure language model. What would it do?

Now we compare the representations of just embedding the text I showed you before compared to the model generating the text given this prompt. And this is what we see as alignment. As you can see from the x-axis, you're going from larger or smaller language models to larger language models. And the idea is that as you go from uh embedding text to generating text across all language model sizes, the alignment increases.

Meaning that generating text creates more alignment than simply just embedding the text. And this is just simply asking the language model to imagine Now let's take this further about asking language models for things. What happens when you ask a language model to imagine senses it never experienced?

For example, what if you ask a language model to imagine seeing something?

Or you ask a language model to imagine hearing something? And again, we simply just do that by asking the language model via text, imagine what it would look like to see the caption.

Or in the case of hearing, imagine what it would sound like to hear the caption.

Now to quantify this more, let's take our data set. This is again Wikipedia and text. So you have images and you have corresponding captions. And you can imagine there's a kernel space, right? A space of kernels that exist. And when you ask a language model to imagine something with the caption, it creates a kernel via representation space into one part of that kernel space.

But if you ask a model to imagine seeing something, it creates a different kernel. What if that kernel were actually closer to a vision model actually seeing that scene?

And furthermore, what if you said imagine hearing made that kernel closer to an actual model hearing that sound?

And that's what we call sensory prompting. Asking the model to imagine senses it never had to see what happens to this current representation space.

So let's go through an example. So this is an example where there's an image and then this is the caption to that image.

Awaiting a pitch batter, catcher, and umpire in baseball.

So again, we prompt the model. Imagine what it look like to see that caption.

And this is what the language model says, or at least a part of what it says. I need to visualize a baseball field. The batter stands at home plate, right? They're holding the bat probably in a ready position, feet shoulderwidth apart. Their body language shows that they're focused. Pretty good. Now we also almost ask it imagine hearing that now it's guessing much more auditory right saying there's a general ambient noise of the stadium crowd murmurs maybe some distant cheers and chatter the sound of players moving like cleat scraping the dirt on the dirt gloves being adjusted and what we see is that if you were to just simply embed the caption potentially with those prompts without those prompts the alignment doesn't change very much meaning that if you compare the alignment to a vision model on the left here and you said let me embed the vision prompted thing slash the auditory prompted thing the alignment doesn't change with compared to the imagine prompted thing or the no sensory cue right but the model generates text you see this dissociation now where suddenly the cq is more aligned to the vision model than the hearq or th the imagine Q and you see the reverse process happen given that you ask a model hearing thing and you measure the alignment to an auditory model actually hearing that thing. You see that the hear is higher for the alignment to the text that the language model generate based on hearing or imagine hearing to the audio model.

Now what we can also do is measure how alignment changes as you generate more tokens. Meaning that as a language model talks more how does alignment change?

And what we see for both alignment to the auditory or alignment to the vision model, the alignment increases as the model generates more tokens.

And furthermore, we can do now do more counterfactuals, right? We could potentially say let's convert the se the seeing text to hearing text. Meaning that we can rewrite the text that the language model generated to, you know, imagine what the scene would sound like audibly rather than how it looks and convert that text. So that gives us a counterfactual showing that we could convert from you know seeing biased text to hearing biased text and that looks like this. So I showed you the caption before right and the idea is that this time when the model rewrites that caption from seeing to hearing it says this the scene hums with anticipation the only sounds the soft rustle of grass underfoot and the occasional murmur of the crowd in the distance. A tense silence hangs in the air. It's very literary but also very auditory I think. So it's very cool. Um we can also do the other way around too right? compare or convert the hearing text to seeing text and in that case you can imagine rewriting the text.

So it looks like this going from you know hearing to seeing.

So in that case it says you know the batter stands at the home plate gripping the bat tightly his muscles coiled in anticipation his eyes locked onto the pitcher scanning for the slightest movement. So also very much more visual and what you find is that when you convert those uh generations into corresponding like reversing the see seeing Q to hearing Q and hearing Q to seeing Q you get a reversal meaning that the alignment goes down to the vision model when you convert seeing to hearing. But when you go convert hearing to seeing the alignment goes up showing that the text does actually and the generation does influence the uh representation alignment.

Similarly, something happens also but not as strong for auditory models.

Meaning that the alignment to the auditory model increases when you convert the seeing generated text to hearing generated text and the alignment corresponding goes up to the audio auditory model.

Now what we can also do is other manipulations and inflations too right we can also remove sensory specific words from the descriptions right so for example we can convert the text from these seeing or hearing Q text these sensory bias cues to potentially very neutral text in that case I took showed you the caption before it will get converted into this for example I need to picture a setting related to baseball game specifically near the area where our batter stands one person this position to take their turn, possibly preparing for an action. So obviously there's not as much sensory information, if at any in this text anymore. And what we find is that the alignment goes down to the vision model when you remove those sensory cued words.

It also goes down for the auditory model. So this is what we expect, right?

And furthermore, what we find is that alignment is higher as you go to larger and larger models. So I showed you before the embedding now the generating text as more capable language models generate more text their alignment to the vision model or the auditory model increases. So we see the same trends we saw before.

Now what about senses that humans don't have? You know in the space and spirit of asking for things what if we ask the language model to imagine senses that are maybe biologically relevant in maybe various kind of biology settings but aren't senses that we as humans have.

for example, X-ray crystalallography or cryomm.

What about senses humans don't have?

What happens when a language model imagines those? So, let's uh take an aside here. So, this is a protein structure and this is its corresponding name. And the idea is that you can now measure alignment to potentially an alpha fold like model called ESM3 by giving the sequence of that protein to ESM3 and it obviously generates you know the structure prediction of that protein. and measuring the alignment if you prompted a language model with the protein name and ask it to generate you know various properties of the protein and this is the response it gives you know it says okay I need to provide a thorough summary of the protein name let me start by recalling what I know about these proteins and it starts going into it so again this is generation so the x-axis here is number of generated tokens and as a language model generates more tokens the alignment to the alphapobic model increases As you go to larger and larger language models, you see that the alignment again shifts upwards, meaning that the alignment increases to the protein model as you increase the capabilities or the language modeling capabilities of the language model. So you see the alignment across not just you know vision and uh auditory models but potentially also across biologically relevant models.

So in summary for this part of the talk I just want to say maybe you can just ask for perception. The idea being that maybe if you ask a model to imagine seeing something or ask a model to imagine hearing something that might steer representations of a model that doesn't have those senses towards modality specific representations.

And furthermore sensory alignment improves as language models generate more text. So as they talk more about imagining something, they actually align more to that sensory specific representation or modality specific representation.

Furthermore, maybe there are senses that we don't have and those modalities that we don't experience can also be aligned to. The idea being that maybe there's this notion of subjective experience present arguably maybe in the LLM that can be evoked just by queuing it with this text Q.

And furthermore, I think to emphasize representation alignment isn't just, you know, a curious observation, it also potentially corresponds to better downstream performance on language specific tasks. For example, representation alignment can predict downstream performance quite well. So if you measure the alignment to a vision model, you can see that that alignment is strongly correlated with a language model's performance on a downstream language specific task. In this case, hello Swag is like a common sense reasoning task.

Now I showed you various forms of similarity, right? I showed you similarities across different architectures.

I also showed you similarities across different modalities.

And I also showed you if you ask for some notion of modality specific representation of language models, you might observe similarities that align better to that modality.

But with all this notions of convergence of artificial biological systems, what questions about biology, for example, can we answer? And in this part of the talk, I want to go over the notion of controlling similarity or alignment.

Meaning that if you have an invivo model and you have an encilico model, if you can control that alignment and that convergence, does that tell you something about biology? For example, if you increase the alignment, does that tell you some aspect of biology versus if that alignment goes down, what does that tell you? And what does that teach you about biology? So to get into it, why do we have a phobia? So there might be some people that already know this answer, but I think this was a interesting question in vision science for a while because it was a very specific pattern. And that pattern is that when you focus your retina in the center field of view over an image, you have high acuity and you can see the butterfly. But if you shift or sacad, you have a very different uh acuity over the B, which is very sharp now, but the butterfly goes out of focus.

And this is a property of the retinal tiling in our eye.

So in order to describe why we have a phobia, what is a phobia? As I mentioned earlier, it's a very specific retinal tiling pattern in our eye given by retinal ganglion cells. So on the left here, you'll see the tiling in our retina of the density of cells in the center field of view being higher and as you go to the periphery, it becomes less dense and each of those cells has a receptive field governed by the circle on the right. So you have many different cells and renal ganglen cells are effectively if you can imagine for those non neuroscience like the pixels of the eye and there's a very specific scaling law to this structure actually it's kind of interesting as you go from the center field of view towards the outer center field of view as a function of eentricity it follows a very specific pattern that's almost linear actually it's basically perfectly linear in terms of the the receptive field size of each gangalene cell.

So in order to ask these questions about convergence, we have to make a model of this rhino gangen cell. And we do this by instantiating each granogen cell as a 2D gausian. And 2D gausian has, you know, two very convenient components that are both differentiable, a mean and a variance. And it is that now you can have a set of gausians represent each retinal gangleen cell. And the idea is that now you can potentially build like arguably a simple artificial retina.

So now we can convert the invivo model that we observe in biology to potentially an incilico model and potentially we can install that you know given all these neural networks that exist today into a model that can attend over an image right so it can actually sakad over an image and the idea is that it's looking around this image and because the retina we designed is differentiable we can optimize the retina itself and this is you know very similar to for example a jumping spider looking around its you know environment right it's trying to figure out what's going on in the scene and it's trying to in this case classify the emnest digit given some clutter and other aspects in the image and this is what happens as we optimize a system to perform well at the task of just classifying what is in the image you'll see that over the course of you know these updates and and optimizations the cells do something interesting they move around but they also move around a very specific pattern where you have these high acuity cells in the center and you have these low acuity cells in the outside, right? So it's effectively forming a phobia.

And what's interesting is that we can do counterfactuals because we have this incilico model, right? Before I showed you as you go from this initial uniform retinal tiling with these cells that have the same receptive field size over the course of evolution v optimization, in this case gradient descent, you form a phobia. But because it's an incilical model, we can do counterfactuals like saying, "What if the eyes could zoom?" Meaning that what if it could rescale that receptive field just dynamically, that grid would just be rescaled higher or lower, and it could zoom in and zoom out on an image.

And what we find is that if you try to optimize a rental tunnel that way, a phobia does not emerge.

So that teaches you a property of the purpose of a phobia and how it's used.

For example, let's go from left to right each time point as the model is looking over the image or cutting over the image. What you see is that as it looks over the image, at first it sees something in its periphery and then it actually looks directly at it by looking by pointing its high acuity region towards that digit and classifying that digit. So that's how it's using the phobia over time.

But when it's zooming, it doesn't need a phobia because all it says is I see something in my periphery. Let me literally just zoom in on that and put my, you know, all my cells on that.

Now, you could argue, what about what if the data were different? What if you didn't have, you know, all these digits of the same size, but you had varying sizes among these digits?

So, for example, the data set on the first row is MS digits where they're all the same size. On the second row is MS digits of random rescalings.

And what you find is that if you train on data set one, you get a biodal distribution of high acuity cells versus low acuity cells. But if you train on something that has much more contiguous scaling, so there's many different digits of different sizes, you get a much more continuous version of the density of the cells in terms of the receptive field sizes and the ranges of them. And furthermore, if you were to just do the zooming and give the model the ability to zoom, you don't see that uh phobia emerge.

Now, I've been asking a lot of what if questions, right? And that was for a particular part of the eye. But what if we expanded this and became more ambitious? What if we said, let's build a what if machine for the entire vision system? In this case, what if we just started with a single photo receptor and we let that evolve out and maybe different tasks emerge in this ecosystem for this animal that has a single photo receptor. What kind of eyes would it create? What kind of optics would it create?

And furthermore, what kind of variations in the brain will it create?

So this is what we call the notion of like an eyeball. And in this case, the eyeball has many different properties that can evolve. For example, it can involve the number of eyes via mutation and where those eyes are placed.

Furthermore, it can change potentially the field of view of each eye, the number of eyes, the eye positions, the pupil size, the optical element, the photo number of photo receptors and so on so forth. But furthermore, what that eye feeds into, we can also evolve as well. For example, how much memory does that brain have and how many neurons does that brain have?

Now, in this case, we're doing reinforcement learning to train these systems because a lot of those properties aren't differentiable like in the phobia. we have to do reinforcement learning. And in this case, let me show you our environment. So this is a top view. This center area is a top view of the little eyeball. And these three red squares are what the eyeball sees given it has three eyes. And the idea is that it has to navigate towards this green ball which is by this green circle on top of it as it's differentiating between avoiding the red ball. So it shouldn't go to the red ball, it should only go to the green ball. The green ball you could argue was some form of food and the red ball is maybe some form of poison or something.

But we can also create other environments, right? Not just detection of going the green ball, but we can also do things like navigation. You know, try to get to a goal position without, you know, hitting it hitting as few walls as possible or potentially tracking an object. Maybe those balls are actually moving around the environment. And the idea would be that it would have to go towards a green ball while avoiding touching the red ball as they move around the environment.

So on the left side here is the eyeball in an environment of pure navigation and on the right side here is an environment of just detecting as I showed you before and this is what happens over the course of evolution. On the left side you see that the number of eyes and the field of view and how they're spread out dramatically increases but each eye is actually pretty low resolution. Whereas on the right side, you'll see that it decides to settle on just three eyes.

But all those three eyes actually have fairly high resolution. Not as high resolution as maybe we us as humans, but high resolution enough that it actually can do the task of detection fairly well.

So if the goals are different, we see differentiation from the notion of arguably compound eyes to the notion of camera type eyes given that you're doing detection.

And the idea is that you can measure these and for example in the cutie in cycles per degree of each eye. And notice that for navigation the cutie is very low and the cutie is very high for detection uh agents versus the total field of view for navigation is much higher than the total field of view for the tracking agent or the detection agent.

And furthermore, the number of photoceptors per eye is actually much higher for the detection agent compared to the navigation agent.

And again, the number of eyes is much higher for the navigation agent compared to the detection agent.

So, let me give you an example of how it performs at generation zero. It's hitting a lot of walls, right? just to show you that it's not doing quite well.

But as it evolves that, you know, simple eye into something that has a bit more uh numerosity and field of view, it actually can do, for example, the navigation task quite well.

Now, in our case, we observe something interesting over the course of, for example, the detection task, it can control its pupil size, right? So the aperture arguably and it is that it starts out with an open eye and then it slowly closes into a pinhole eye.

But if you introduce the notion of refraction of light, what happens?

Is there a different kind of tree of evolution that emerges given that you introduce some notion of optics into the system?

So this is the evolution of a system that doesn't have the notion of you know refraction into its uh environment. And the idea here is that over the course of many generations, the pupil size closes more and more because it needs higher and higher acuity to do for example the detection task.

So that basically is represented by for example the eye slowly closing. But it can't close too much right because as you close the aperture you let less light light in which means you get less signal. So if the uh resolution on the zoom is okay, you can see that as you close the pupil side in the center, the actual viewpoint of the agent becomes sharper, but it also becomes harder and harder to get any light in. So this is kind of a trade-off you make if you just had the notion of controlling the pupil size.

But what if the eyes could actually bend light? What if you introduce a notion of refractive material in the eye? Well, it takes a different actually evolutionary path. So let's say we introduce the refractive material at generation around 27 or 28. What happens is that the pupil size opens back up again. And the reason it opens back up again because evolution actually figures out in our environment how to create a lens to focus that light. So now it gets rid of that trade-off and suddenly now that bottleneck is removed and now a lens actually emerges in our system.

So you can imagine that that creates a different branch of evolution in some sense where you have this bottleneck that created this pinhole eye and it couldn't get any better. But once you introduce optics, the trade-off is removed and now you can actually increase the pupil size while still being able to focus light.

Now I hinted you at the notion that the brain size is also a parameter that can be evolved, right? In this case, let's say you had the detection task and you were to measure the task error on the detection. So distance from the object that you're trying to detect and you were to say as you increase the number of parameters, what happens? You might have two hypotheses here, right?

Which is a bigger brain is always better. A larger brain with more parameters, you know, we know this from, you know, obviously the the whole space of AI right now. Bigger is always better, right?

But maybe there's diminishing returns.

And actually we see a little bit of both. And let me explain. For each line here is a particular cycles per degree.

So a particular uh acuity uh constraint on the model. And you can see that if the acuity does not increase a larger brain size actually if you trace one of these lines saturates. Meaning that a larger brain is only better if you're also allowed to increase the acuity that goes into that brain. Well, this is a kind of a nice scaling law showing that as you increase the brain size, you also have to increase other bottlenecks.

Otherwise, you don't get a performance of a larger brain.

This is true not just for detection but also for the navigation tasks and also for the tracking tasks. So, as you increase the acuity, you're allowed to have a larger brain. But if you only constrain the acuity, you are not your a larger brain does not help you at all.

And what's interesting is that if you're familiar with the language model space, you'll know that this is a very similar pattern you observe in actual scaling laws of these large language models. And this is from a paper that arguably is the reason why we're investing a trillion dollars into data centers today. And it's because they want to increase the parameter size of the model assuming that it'll have a very predictable way of reducing the loss.

But when you increase the parameter size, you also have to increase other factors as well. And this is true not just for language models but also across all these other modalities like image to text, text to image, image models in general, math models, video models and so on and so forth. So the scaling law is very consistent.

So I hope I've kind of presented a reasonable argument for why scaling laws can be observed both in, you know, very simple environments but also very complex and arguably economically impactful environments as well. And there could be similar reasons for what's causing those things to happen.

Furthermore, I showed you the differences between convolution attention and how they're actually converging despite them being structurally different from each other.

And furthermore, I showed you, you know, again, the modality differences and despite despite them being on very entirely different data sets, they are also aligning more and more as they increase their capability.

And furthermore, I showed you potentially how controlling the alignment, increasing it or decreasing it in some sense can tell you more about aspects of biology.

So let's imagine future work. And in order to imagine that I want to describe to you maybe the notion of what is alignment from a philosophical perspective.

You know some people might argue it's a consistent representation across all modalities.

But I argue that maybe it's just a consistent representation across all projections of the real world.

Now, here's where it gets a little more philosophical. What is science? I argue that science is the search for consistent representation of the real world.

What if we optimized for alignment to find consistent representations?

And to go over that let me give you a notion of you know Plato's hypothesis that he had another one not just for you know the allegory of the cave but also he had hypothesis for eyes. In this case this was a common belief I think during his time where there was this belief that the way we see is through this notion of emission theory meaning that we actually have from our eyes projecting out an invisible light that hits objects and that's how we actually see objects. And that was a hypothesis.

And the idea is that if you're doing science, you could perhaps do an experiment like a pinhole camera to measure if that hypothesis is aligned to my representation of the world or my observation of the world.

And this actually created the notion of intrammission theory, which is the actually correct view, which is not that our eyes emit light, but that light comes into our eyes and that's how we see. It reflects off of objects and it goes into our eye.

And to kind of keep up with, you know, crossing different, you know, millennia of citations, let me go over one particular person that's particularly important for this belief of, you know, science and how to do it. And this was from someone from the uh Middle East called Alhazison.

Now, Alison arguably, I think, is probably the first person that really formalized the scientific method. And he did that by, you know, I showed you before introducing this idea of intermission theory. And he solved that.

And he had this very good quote that I like to cite which is this idea that he believes the duty of man who investigates the writings of scientists if learning the truth is his goal is to make himself an enemy of all that he reads and attack it from every side.

And I like that quote because I think it kind of describes what we're seeing with this notion of convergence and alignment. We have a hypothesis space and things that solve vision create some notion of intersection of this hypothesis space with things that solve language. And the intersection arguably is a more constrained representation.

And we're using for example grain descent when we optimize these models to constrain the hypothesis more and more to have this consistent representation across both vision and language.

Furthermore, if you imagine the notion of evolution, it's trying to find given these task constraints of like for example attending to a scene versus having limited resolution. It's trying to find a consistent representation that satisfies both properties to create a con more constrained and more consistent hypothesis space that's successful at that task.

And furthermore, for example, if you had limited brain size and you had to do the task of detection and you expose the model to natural selection, potentially that creates one version of a notional evolutionary tree for eyes, for example, camera type eyes. But in a different task, it might create a different representation or a different hypothesis intersection of for example uh compound eyes.

And I argue maybe this is how science itself works where you have one experiment that creates a hypothesis space and constrains it and you have another experiment that also constrains the hypothesis space and the truth is the intersection of those two parts. And ideally ideally peer review should constrain the hypothesis space more and more.

And I argue that we're kind of in a time where this is very possible in the notion of AI models because AI models are simply just embedding models. And if you can embed it, I argue you can align it. And because experiments are written in text, we have text models, modalities can be embedded as well. And these all can be converted to neural neural network representations. They become interchangeable and also alignable. And this is why I argue that we should optimize for alignment.

And again, you can do you know various forms of alignment just by looping the systems across these different hypothesis spaces. And the consistent representation will be the ones that survive this loop of alignment.

And the idea is that the intersection will get you closer at the notion of truth than any individual observation in one modality.

And again, alignment corresponds to per better performance in self-consistent domains. Like I said showed you before, the notion of alignment to a common sense data set became better as the language model aligned better to a vision model.

And this is also true for the domains like math. In this case, alignment to a vision model actually makes the language model uh have better predictable performance over math data sets. So instead of observing where alignment goes by optimization, we can choose where this goes.

And I argue that alignment measures when hypotheses are also not consistent. For example, what we expect is that maybe if your hypothesis is in one circle but not the other oval, the alignment might be low. But if once it's in both ovals together, the alignment should be much higher.

For example, in math reasoning, you can imagine embedding this text which is the question and that's the hypothesis and maybe different solutions are generated by the model and you can imagine measuring their alignment and getting at potentially the right answer just by measuring the alignment of the solution to the actual uh correct answer.

Because representation alignment is different also from checking verifiable questions like math because you can do soft verification. In this case potentially what if you just took our paper and you embedded the hypothesis or the abstract and then you embedded the results via maybe a text or vision model.

You can measure the similarity across those two things and you can measure some notion of alignment between those two things whether they agree or not without actually defining a verifiable reward for example. So I think it's nice for a position of soft verification.

So I argue that alignment not only enables AI for science but also science for AI models.

Thank you.

Also I'm starting a lab uh next year and if people know of any students or people interested in postto please let me know.

>> Thank you Brian. Uh let's start with questions. Uh David, >> this is a great talk. Thank you very much. It's very fascinating work you're doing. Um so I have a some I guess some um philosophy of language questions and philosophy of vision questions and then I want to get to some philosophy of biology and epistemology questions. But let's just go back to this alignment idea with the real world. Now one of the um you know contested things in the philosophy of language is what is the function of language right?

>> Right. and um or the the goal of language and you know most people and I agree you know they say the basic goal is to um get the truth about the world right that language is bas basically factual. So, one way to sort of play with that as far as your work goes is if you fed data into uh if you if you looked at fed a language model data from like cartoon um cartoon scripts, you know, like where where it's totally not the real world, right? And cartoon language and and see what you get, right? because that so that would test in a different setting.

You're not, you know, aiming at the real world. Who knows what you're aiming at, right? So that would be I think an interesting experiment to do to see how that plays out.

>> I really like that actually a lot because I think that can say you can have imagined worlds that don't actually reflect our reality, but those have rules in them and can it kind of figure out just being a language model those rules and if they align with the rules that are actually present in a simulator or something. I definitely think that would be >> Yeah. So yeah, no, you're right. So you might get a situation where you have an imaginary world and the language it the language you get alignment because there's rules for that imaginary world different from our physical world.

Right.

>> Right.

>> Um >> the other thing I want to point out which is very interesting I was very fascinated about the evolution of the eye and your discussion you know there and toward the end >> but one thing and people have written on this this idea of evolutionary epistemology.

Um basically you can argue that um our knowledge is tailored to our environment. The kind of knowledge that we have we've evolved to perceive the environment in a certain way. And basically we've evolved to for you know a picture of reality that's like you know middlesize objects cause and effect all that kind of stuff that you know we live the world the common sense world we live in. But if you go down to the quantum level right of reality >> we haven't evolved to perceive that.

Right.

>> Right. Um so that's just another thing to think about that um we might have sort of perceptual me oh and this gets into the whole deception thing that our our our perception may be have evolved to actually deceive us but evolution doesn't care because that allows us to survive. Okay, I'll stop there. Thank you. No, I like that a lot because I think like I've always wondered if like a lot of the things that we're seeing as commonalities or is this notion of search light bias? Meaning that are we just seeing the things that we are used to seeing and we're kind of orienting the notion of intelligence itself across those things we can do well and that creates this kind of search light bias of like what about things that we don't do well like what about the notions of intelligence in those spaces and how those would be potentially different or not necessarily convergent to what we potentially perceived. I think it's hard to remove that because our definitions of intelligence are definitely very biased to what we can do and what we find interesting and that's like a yeah it's a a hard thing to remove out of the uh the observations we see >> thank you so much for the talk I have a a technical and a philosophical uh question um so the technical question is um I came across uh some work I have not read the paper but uh Um apparently it proves that uh the uh convolutional neural networks are basically uh a subset of transformers because uh the convolutional filters basically sort of paying attention to the neighbor neighboring pixels but transformers sort of pay attention to things at longer distances as well. So do I think you kind of touched on it. So do you think that has a u you know say something about your results? The other philosophical question is um if the idea is that different modalities converge to similar representations, why do you think biology has different modalities in the first place? Right? So um maybe so so may maybe the idea maybe the idea is uh maybe you shouldn't put all the weight into consistency. Maybe there is a uniqueness or consistency absolutely biology is optimizing. Um yeah just a thought. What do you think?

>> So I guess to answer the first question the notion of like equivalence between convolution attention is something that theoretically is possible but the actual resources to empirically observe that would require for example a comment by a multi-layer perceptron and attention model is vice versa. They're both universal function approximators, but the sizes of it to actually represent that function properly would be so dramatically inefficient that we can't realize it. At least not right now with the hardware we have. We've tried this actually before and we it's just not enough GPU memory to create the equivalent comnet to an MLP or the equivalent attention model to be the exact same thing as a convolution. So all the comparisons I'm showing you right now are situations where the resources of it learning the identical representation of being exact same function as a competent are not possible given these constraints. Um to your second point about biology having diverted representations. I think this is an interesting aspect which is we don't necessarily observe convergence across every single uh representation of the modality.

Right? We don't observe it in a raw image compared to raw text. it seems to be in an abstract space or a more abstract space than just directly the representations themselves. So I think in some sense biology from like a input sensory level has evolved conver uh divergent aspects to fit that sensory system. The question is when it feeds into learning abstractions about that sensory system does it become potentially more aligned in those abstract spaces? So I think yeah there's a notion of like you know going back to the notion of levels of analysis the idea that the hardware itself might be different but then potentially the higher level goals of it might actually be much more similar to each other and this is something that I don't have a good uh systematic way to view when we expect alignment and when we don't expect alignment but it seems to be like these bottlenecks that occur like you know Phil is described this as you know these uh intelligence bottlenecks where there's only kind of a few solutions that could possibly solve this thing and those bottlenecks cause convert representations. Whereas if there's many ways to solve the thing the same thing, then these bottlenecks don't exist.

>> Great. Thank you, >> Doug.

>> Yeah. Hi. It's terrific. Um I have um a a comment, a suggestion, and a question for you on the three parts of your talk.

So the comment why there should be convergence. Um, back in the 1800s before Chsky, the notion in linguistics was that language does model the outside world and the way you process it does do that. Then all that all kind of died when the got replaced by by the idea that um, language involves arbitrary symbols involving some kind of syntax.

And then um Harad in 1990 argued that cognition can't work that way because what cognition has to do, it has to compare things, contrast things, generalize. And so for that, your symbols, your mental symbols need to contain some resemblance to whatever the reference is. If you have an arbitrary symbol, the information just isn't there. You can't do it. Um, so and then so he called those grounded symbols. And then I can tell you that if you take a grounded symbol approach to language, um, you can write a program that will process English rather well in 8 megabytes of of software, half of which is the dictionary. Um, I'll talk a little bit about that in um, a talk I promised Hanella and Mike I would record. I will do that this afternoon.

um and also about what kinds of universals are in your head and some other biological things. Uh the the the caveat with all that and my concern is that then the implication of all this convergence is that um as soon as you start grounding your words by training an LLM on vision and robotic manipulations, now your AI can do cognition. And that bothers me a bit.

And I I think that's going to happen whether somebody's trying to do it or not. So that's my comment. My suggestion is a a question for you to ask your AIS.

Back when I was a posttock, I had a um a housemate who was a Harvard psych major and she was trying to get us to imagine what it would be like if a four-dimensional sphere passed through our universe. It took me a couple of days, but it would be you talk about asking it about senses it doesn't know about. Ask it what it ask that question about a four-dimensional object. Um my question is that um a lot of this optimization you said relied on the variables being differentiable. I've seen that phrase come up in a lot of different contexts and I don't know what the implication is. what's so important about being differentiable?

>> So the main workhorse of training these models and the ability for them to intake data is this notion of uh scastic gradient descent. So what they do is they feed in data points and they have a loss function and they apply basically calculus on minimizing that loss function by taking tiny steps into lowering the loss and that tiny step requires you to have a differentiable function because that would create smoothness in the function space that allows you to lower the loss incrementally over and over again.

>> So there so you're basically asking for smooth functions.

>> Yeah, smooth. Smooth enough. It doesn't have to be like crazy smooth like there are activation functions like real u that are technically not differentiable from a mathematical sense but are for all intents and purposes mostly differentiable and those work as well.

So it has to be like reasonably stable functions arguably non- chaotic functions is probably the better way to >> is a is a square wave differentiable >> uh almost everywhere except for obviously the parts where they step function right so a value is kind of like that where it's like a a function that is flat and then it goes to y equals x and that corner is not differentiable technically but the probability of hanging that kernel is very low so for all intents and purposes it's good enough >> I see okay that's helpful thank you Yeah. Um, in terms of your point about the the grounding aspect, actually I really like this aspect that someone brought up uh during one of the presentations I gave where the notion that a dictionary isn't grounded. It kind of is self referential, right?

>> And the idea is that like those sufferes actually create kind of all these simultaneous equations you could argue in the system that are consistent with each other. And the idea is that even though it's not necessarily grounded in any sense of you know grounding, it has this consistency of the relationships of other objects, it has of other words and those relationships actually are the same relationship that you see in the real world. So arguably I think the notion that we're emphasizing in terms of alignment is this notion of objects and words and the relationships that they keep with other words. So kind of a very I guess Wikensteinian view of uh what representations are. They're not, you know, anything meaningful by themselves, but they're meaningful by the relationships they keep with other objects or other things.

>> So that's interesting. So that would be your rebuttal to Sirill's Chinese room argument that yes, this is all circular, but if you only pay attention to the relations within the circle, even though it has no obvious connection to the outside world, there's still something there.

>> Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. H >> Okay.