Título: "Why physical systems find Platonic patterns" by Pavel Chvykov
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mOWfZncXt_g
Duración: 41.0 min
Idioma de subtítulos: en
Nota: Keynote / presentation

Thanks uh Michael for inviting me to present at the symposium. So uh my name is Pavle Czechov and um I did my PhD at MIT working with Jeremy England on the physics of origins of life. So information theoretical statistical physics methods of how does inanimate dynamical systems inanimate matter start to exhibit lifelike adaptive or learning or intelligent behaviors in this most rudimentary sense. uh and since then I've been applying complex systems theory which we've been using there to uh other questions of social structure formation um psychological or cognitive abilities and where those come from. Uh and so um lately we're building this uh center for uh complex systems and contemplative studies uh which um sort of tries to apply those complex systems methods to understand the big picture philosophical questions uh such as existential or origins of agency free will uh and really bring together researchers uh in this. So it's kind of a collaboration research collaboration or consortium. Uh and I'm also affiliated with Institute for Globally Distributed Open Research now. And today I'll talk to you about um why physical systems find platonic patterns. So how do platonic patterns or forms or these abstract uh concepts uh and logic uh start to influence and ingress on the physical world which is sort of one of the questions that uh Mike posted posed in in the as a framing for the symposium.

So okay uh platonic space inside. So I'll give up the first uh three slides to sort of uh introduce the framing of the symposium for those who are just uh dropping in and maybe haven't seen some of the other talks and also kind of to to motivate how I understand this problem space. Uh so first of all it seems curiously and interestingly that uh abstract concepts can somehow cause physical phenomena and that's a very interesting perspective that um we're discussing in this series talk series um and to motivate it I'll just give three examples. So one of the most common ones is the periodic cicators that emerge every 13 to 17 years which are sort of prime number of year cycles so that they u can avoid and offset from predators who might emerge every two or four years. Uh so this way the structure of prime numbers sort of the number theory of how primes work seems to cause some real world behavior right if if 13 was not prime then perhaps this would not be the the cycle that these cicators would have uh evolved to follow.

Um and we can talk about causality here in this kind of uh formal Judea pearl counterfactual sense right that like if we can imagine a world where 13 is not prime so counterfactually then something else would have different and so in that formal sense we can say that uh the structure of prime numbers or some ideas from number theory actually cause some physical world behaviors.

Uh another idea that from Mike Leven's work uh is uh in embryogenesis uh and basically that uh embryos kind of navigate this morpho space or space of shapes uh to reach an adult morphology uh and this abstract space sort of creates a real navigational task such that if something goes wrong if if then the you know in in many cases the embryo can still find its way back to the correct target morphology. uh and this is also true in cases of amputations and regenerative uh processes and and lizards uh as well as perhaps in convergent evolution right where uh same sort of useful um concept is discovered from multiple very different uh paths in evolutionary history.

Uh and so yeah so in in this way I guess we can say that this this useful concept is sort of causing uh the different organisms to to find it and to adapt it.

uh and the example I really like is is sort of the shape of uh atomic orbitals uh and therefore also the shape of molecules which are uh just spherical harmonics. So circle harmonics are this purely abstract mathematical structure which are solutions of the circle applause equation and they're illustrated in this picture here. So they're this very non-trivial shapes that just come from the solutions of a very simple uh differential equation.

And it turns out that these solutions are exactly what the uh the atomic orbitals uh look like and the shapes of molecules are to a large extent kind of at least small molecules are dictated by these shapes of the orbitals. So um yeah here I guess we're trying to illustrate how uh logical or mathematical or um these abstract concepts can cause something real in the physical world which seems very strange in a way and the questions that arise here are for example how can uh an abstract concept impact something real or how do platonic patterns ingress into physical reality so here for example you know 2 plus 2= 4 is an abstract logical sort of necessity uh and that's abstractly true and then it somehow constrains something about real world objects such as counting sheep, right? Uh the alternative perspective is that perhaps symbols and patterns emerge from physical reality.

They're not existing before physical reality and independent of it, but uh so in the case of 2 plus 2als 4, it only starts to make sense when you have uh sheep to counteractly speaking or when you basically have two different objects where in the physical world no two sheep are ever the same. So you need to come up with the idea that okay these two animals are actually similar enough that we're going to call them both sheep and then we can start to count the number of these things right which are not identical right the the idea of uh you know the mathematical number one is is always identical as any other one. So you can add them two and have two and have four, right? Um whereas you know adding together sheep, you know, only makes sense once you have the abstraction that you know all sheep are in some meaningful way identical to us.

And then you know you start to have these ideas like okay I can count sheep using these sorts of um the third perspective is is sort of a more feedback u loop perspective where um the patterns that are derived from experience also define and shape experience. So 2 plus2 is four. Yes, it emerged and evolved from counting sheep in a meaningful way, but then it also shaped all of sheep farming and then all of economics and society that we now live in. So, it has very real, very measurable consequences on the physical world in a sense. [clears throat] So, um this sort of outlines um three perspective on platonism that I'm sort of seeing emerging in this uh symposium talk series. Um and um I'm going to call them transcendental, emergent, and participatory. Uh because um I'm not sure if there are uh standard terms for this, but these seem appropriate for kind of the ideas I'm trying to convey.

Um and the transcendental would be that okay, patterns exist in a realm independent of and prior to physical instantiation. So um uh yeah, abstract platonic forms that then that exist regardless of if the physical world exists. Emergent is the opposite.

patterns arise from and are inseparable from physical or cognitive processes. Uh and participatory sort of creates the phys the feedback loop between those two. Uh so patterns in physical reality create each other. So chicken and egg.

So you cannot meaningfully say which one is prior than the other. They are very much arising in codependency.

So the three perspective roughly align with sort of idealist philosophy, materialist philosophy and non-dual philosophy I would say. um at least it helps me to keep track of them and u basically these also show the sort of road map uh of the talks that I'm going to give which will be in three parts roughly aligning these perspectives. So the first I will talk about emergent order from mixed chaos and dynamical systems. So so work we just published a few months ago in dynamical systems theory. Second, we'll talk about uh low rattling as a theory of self-organization adaptation which is u from a few years back which was my kind of PhD thesis uh and it sort of illustrates this emergent platonism a little uh better I think and I will try to then kind of connect to uh this third perspective which I guess to me makes feels the most right but I'm not going to take really a position on this but um which is yeah low rattling as a mechanism for active inference and this is uh current work that we're doing now.

Uh, and the three things I'll talk about are really concrete dynamical systems, mathematical, and physics uh, results uh, that I'm loosely categorizing under these three philosophical headings. But I think they're really great sort of test grounds and examples to think about when we're trying to understand these three perspectives.

Okay, so let's dive into the first one.

Emergent order from mixed chaos. So this is a paper we published in scientific reports in I think November 2025 with uh my old PhD adviser Jeremy England [clears throat] uh and I think it illustrates transcendental plagism to some extent.

So uh first just to define the terms what is mixed chaos.

uh in Hamiltonian dynamical systems which is certain ideal [clears throat] sort of form of dynamical systems without any damping or noise. So somehow not really realizable in the physical world [clears throat] exactly but uh a very useful mathematical idealization.

Um and these dynamics can be um chaotic or regular. So we know a single pendulum is kind of regular dynamics. It's very predictable. A double pendulum is chaotic dynamics. It's a very good example of chaotic dynamics. But um most systems actually have both uh behaviors available depending on the initial conditions. So if you imagine a double pendulum and you imagine starting it in initial conditions that are just slightly perturbed from just hanging straight down, it's not going to be chaotic. It'll just wobble very regularly. So a double pendulum has both chaotic and regular behavior. System we'll look here uh is actually simpler than that. It's probably the simplest example of mixed chaos and it's the kick rotor. Very classic dynamical system and it's basically just a pendulum where the gravity comes in kicks instead of constantly. So, uh to illustrate that quickly, I'll just show a video so you can see these bursts of downward force [clears throat] basically cause this pendulum to move chaotically.

Right? Uh we can map a trajectory of this pendulum over time. So the two degrees of freedom in the system are theta angle and velocity of the pendulum here. U and we can plot those strooscopically at the moment of kick right which gives this dots right over time. Uh and so this is kind of one trajectory starting from one uh initial condition and evolving over time right and you can see that this is chaotic. So it starts to kind of fill up all of the possible configurations.

Uh but you know if we start the pendulum in very low initial condition uh then it can actually so I'll run a video that's here running much faster. So it's kind of uh let's see if faster than the last one. So the kicks just constantly showing up. But here you can see it's it's just wobbling back and forth between the kicks. And so if we plot a trajectory like that it looks very different in this configuration plot.

Again try a few other initial conditions get a few other trajectories. there's other chaotic other regular trajectories. If we do this a few hundred times, then we get this face portrait. So you can see there's a lot of these islands of regularity, islands of order that have these regular trajectories and a sea of chaos in between them. So that's sort of the canonical structure of a mixed chaos system.

Um so um this is kind of intuitive. You know you can visually see that okay there's chaos here there's regularity here but we might want to uh and for future things in this presentation we we'll want to do this to measure more quantitatively what does it mean that some configurations are chaotic and some are not. So you know how do we quantify chaos? Uh the most obvious way is through leav exponents. So if we start with two slightly different initial conditions we look at how quickly um do these two different initial conditions diverge from each other as we evolve the dynamics. Okay. Uh and if they diverge very quickly, that's uh the definition of chaos, right? Where initial conditions diverge exponentially. So we can uh for every initial point we start with two very very nearby initial conditions and we look at how quickly they diverge and then we map that exponent um with uh color scale in this plot. So red basically means largely have an effect exponent uh very chaotic behavior and then in the islands we see it's either very small red or even sometimes convergent blue. So so this basically matches the the intuition but makes it quantitative right that we can actually map this local exponent and this is shortterm leaf exponent. So we run the trajectories for a short bit of time to see how they diverge initially because after that they they you know go very far away from the initial point and doesn't matter anymore. Um, okay. So, this gives us a way to map the phase portrait of the space. And the interesting thing is that all of these complicated pictures that I drew here are fully encoded in these extremely simple equations of motion that I wrote here. Right? So, there's a certain kind of uh in the sense of platonic patterns. Uh there's a certain elegance and beauty to it that you know just a few symbols enclosed all this complexity and all these kind of fractal uh patterns and behaviors we see here.

So, the entire face portrait is encoded uh in a very short So what we talked about so far was a sort of mathematical idealization right Hamiltonian system without damping without any fluctuations or noise uh and uh sort of we can mathematically calculate what the structure encoded in those equations is right uh when we look at the real world we can um sort of approximate that by adding these uh damping and noise terms to the equation.

So I here is a white noise term. T is sort of the temperature of the bath and B is the strength of how strongly are we coupled to that bath. How how how strong the daff is. When we do that we see that uh this face portrait uh actually for any initial condition trajectories all collapse down to the islands of regularity. So no matter where you start after enough time you're going to fall into one of these islands of regularity.

So regular islands become global attractors when we add damping. Um so this is kind of exciting because uh it shows that kind of the real world emergent behaviors first of all are ordered. So it's kind of an emergent spontaneous emergent order or self-organization phenomena and second of all they reflect this platonic ideal mathematical calculations that we did in this you know uh physically unreal sort of u world without damping and noise.

Um so there's a way in which kind of coupling to the environment reveals the platonic pattern. So it sort of progresses into reality.

Uh and um yeah so even though the the the exactly this pattern behind the equations is never physically realized itself like you can never get a physical system to actually behave like this uh Hamiltonian uh dynamical system should.

Um it still has sort of causal power over how systems tend to behave. So this seems to be not you know specifically a feature of this kicked rotor system where I showed it but actually quite a general phenomena. So the paper that we just published argues for a general conjecture or it introduces a general conjecture that uh any Hamiltonian dynamics exhibiting mixed chaos will settle into islands of order uh upon weekly coupling to a thermal bath at sufficiently low temperature. So we illustrated this on [clears throat] a bunch of examples here uh specifically uh the kick rotor that we just showed.

So here's the map portrait of the leap of exponents, the Hamiltonian trajectories and then the trajectories under damping. So similar for a similar system but just with the hinge being springloaded uh which creates a lot richer kind of phenomenology but uh in all cases the islands of order still become the attractors when we add uh damping. So here there's this six-fold symmetry you see that is then reflected uh in the real world dynamics which are sort of on the right. uh duffing oscillator which is like a forced simple harmonic oscillator but instead of the harmonic potential it has this double well and this sort of base was again this island of order becoming the attractor bouncing ball where you have a plate that's oscillating up and down and a ball that's kind of bouncing elastically on top of that plate. This is another famous chaotic system. Yeah, most most of these systems that are famously chaotic are actually mixed chaotic because there's always some set of initial conditions that will give ordered behavior. uh and so this conjecture we're talking about applies to to all of them. Uh and finally uh a manybody system. So all of these are kind of uh you know two dimensional face portraits. Uh but this principle really works for uh quite generally uh and in particular in many body systems it can cause much more interesting self-organization that we usually associated with the term sk organization. Uh here the phenomenon of zil is a lot richer and also harder to plot in 2D. So uh still all the principles work but the attractors and the behavior that we can expect when we add damping is no longer just zero dimensional uh characterized by you know single point or several points attractors as in these other things but here you can actually have the attractors be uh you know one dimensional threedimensional or even uh fractal dimensional uh yeah so they can be sort of strange attractors in some cases but still uh emerging as uh as the regions that are characterized by sort of low off exponent in in the undamped case. So the principal thing still holds.

Um so one question that we sort of uh struggled with a little bit uh in writing this paper and had some insights uh as we understood uh is sort of why you know we're arguing that okay uh Hamiltonian systems with mixed chaos settle into islands of order but that gives us a predictive power over the damped dynamics if we already know the undamped dynamics but you know why should we start off studying the undamped Hamiltonian dynamics at all right why shouldn't we just study the fullon uh damp dynamics here Right.

So, um what does knowing this platonic ideal uh without damping um kind of give us? Uh and it turns out that besides just giving you know what the attractors what the emergent behavior might look like uh it gives us quite a few different um predictions about uh real world damped dynamics here. So uh for example the phase diagram right?

So if we turn up this temperature, turn up the noise, we expect that these ordered behaviors will at some high enough temperature sort of melt. And so this is what we see. So for any given value of the kick strength, which is the one parameter this system is characterized by, we can tune up the temperature and at some point uh the probability of uh regularization goes to zero. So so there's no order, right? So this is intuitive. The interesting thing here is that the phase boundary has this very complex kind of non-trivial shape, right? As we change the kick strength, the transition temperature changes in this non-obvious way. Uh but it turns out that it's completely dictated by the face portrait of the Hamiltonian system.

Right? So in particular by the size of the regular island. So we can plot the regular island size versus K. And we can see that right depending on the value of K, these islands can take up anywhere from most of the space to a very tiny fraction of the space. uh and this can be plotted and it reflects very closely the shape of the phase boundary. Right?

So there's this physical phenomena the shape of the phase diagram that is kind of accurately predicted by the structure of this phase portrait of the Hamiltonian system or this ideal kind of uh non-physical mathematical system that we study. Uh there's a few other examples like this which show in the paper. For example, the relaxation time or the emer emergence order time scale uh is similarly dictated by uh something in the uh in the Hamiltonian face portrait.

Uh and um and there's an interesting sort of fluctuation dispilibri fluctuation spacation relation t between these things. Okay. So uh going back to our sort of road map uh this was the example of this transcendental platism where some mathematical pattern which here is exemplified by this face portrait of aonian system seems to be predictive of a number of different things uh in a physical system that has damping involves let's go to the second one which is this emergent plagism where patterns arise and are inseparable from physical or cognitive uh processes. Uh so this is um like I said was uh sort of my PhD thesis and uh we published it in science magazine back about five years ago. Uh so this was an exciting work and the reason why it uh was so important is because uh in the context of origins of life research this was sort of pointing out how uh or a mechanism why non-biological dynamical systems can exhibit properties like learning or adaptation in some rudimentary way.

So uh here uh contrary to the last sort of uh point we'll argue that the patterns that uh emerge are not given by some pure platonic realm but uh they form from system environment matching.

So in the last part environment we talked about was very boring only a thermal bath but now we'll [clears throat] consider environments with some structure. So some pattern driving forces uh and [clears throat] this is really just a shift of perspective. will still look at very similar systems or even the same system.

Um and just instead of seeing this uh noise and damping as the environment, we'll see the kicks as the environment.

And now the structure that they have is the timing, the periodicity, right? Uh in fact, I just lied to you. So it's not going to be the exact same system. We'll use the spring-loaded system. So here we have the restoring force. Uh right, just because that makes the illustration a little cleaner, but uh it works across this works across systems.

>> [clears throat] >> So the point is that there's no p pattern in the system itself. Now it's just a simple harmonic oscillator with some noise and damping.

The pattern emerges from the interaction between the system and the environment.

So there's no op priori platonic ideal that uh exists you know prior to the physical space. It only emerges pattern emerges from the interaction with physics. So uh in this specific case we have these sort of two time scale right the the kick period how often the kicks happen and the natural frequency of the spring. So for example if we have uh if we tune the spring frequency we can have for example four kicks per period five or six and in those cases we get the corresponding sort of symmetry of the face portrait right so if we have four kicks period uh then we have this kind of four-fold symmetry you can see of this islands of order still there's the sea of chaos but you know the islands of order have this four four-fold symmetry in the six kicks period you have the sixfold symmetry and for five there's no way that the system can find to match cleanly between the the natural dynamics of the system and the environment and so it's basically just chaos right uh still this is all without damping right um so if I add damping and noise we again see the dynamics collapsing down to islands of order as I said earlier this is in last case you know yeah in the other cases collapses different portraits so uh and um so kind of the interesting thing is that the pattern is not pre-existing as it was in the last section right but it emerges via this low rattling selection or survival of the stable. And so the key here is that it's just a shift of perspective. It's not a shift of you know what system we're looking at. It's a shift of where we decide to cut the system environment boundary, the self versus the other, the internal and the external, right? And we'll see that that boundary is is actually kind of core to a lot of these questions of u I think yeah how does the platonic ingress on the physical?

Um so uh let me explain this low rattling um principle a little uh more detail. So it's a quantitative theory that we use to make a number of predictions and test them and verify them. Uh so basically the idea is that special system configurations are selected uh ones that are sort of adapted to the environmental forces. So they're special not always specifics but they're special with respect to the specific environment that selected. So again here we can plot sort of the locally opponent of exponents as we said before and that's uh these locally operative exponents uh is roughly what rattling is. So it's uh fairly accurate to uh think about rattling as locally open up exponents there's some specific math and algebra to make it precise but that's intuitively what it is and basically we show that uh in the long-term steadystate probability distribution. So if I start with a bunch of initial conditions and I run them for a long time and I look at what are the probabilities of ending up in different configurations of the system uh at that time uh then this distribution is very much predicted by these locally complex points right so all of the points you end up here are the ones that are uh white or in this first picture right so that's sort of the quantitative friction principle that the steady state distribution is given by this sort of Bolzman like factor e to the minus where instead of energy we have rattling right uh and the reason this is interesting is because uh rattling can be measured locally it's a property of the local system state and you can measure it by running dynamics for a short time so the local flexon you run it just for or for a little bit of the dynamics and you already see how chaotic the behavior is whereas the steady state distribution is a property of the long-term system evolution so that's kind of why this is exciting is because you can measure something shortterm and have predictions about what's happening long term Uh it's also exciting because uh this says that the configurations that dominate the steady state are actually low rattling which which are basically the configurations that are that exhibit system environment matching or exhibit some sort of behavior that seems adaptive. Right? So basically if I look at a configuration and I see that it's matched well with the environment where there isn't much uh chaos or randomness happening uh that means that that will be a likely configuration in the long term which then gives a sense of the system adapting over time. So this is sort of this like non-biological adaptation that uh we seem to be pointing at here.

We looked at a a sort of more interesting example uh here which is this robot swarm of smarticles. Uh so each individual robot is just this thing sitting on the table waving its arms. Uh it can't move on its own. When we put a bunch of them together they can push off each other and create these more complex dynamics which are then unsteady. Uh here if I move their arms randomly then you know they just push each other around randomly and nothing particularly interesting happens. But um if I move their arms around in a structured way and so uh this is basically what we're going to be referring to as the environment in this case because we can control that. Again it's a completely arbitrary split what we call environmental forces and what we call inner forces. But here we'll talk about the arm positioning as the environment forces. So these three plots are for the three different robots in the picture and the red and the blue are for the left and the right arm and this is over time. So we control the arm angles uh and we look at what the collective kind of configuration of the swarm is doing.

So if we move them around in a regular fashion then it seems that uh the robots kind of spontaneously find these coordinated choreographed dances and get into them. And for a specific drive pattern for a specific set of external u environmental forces we have a few different configurations that they can get into. And each of these is very regular, very kind of matched to the environment.

So uh smart spontaneously find these coordinated collective behaviors uh when we drive them in a structured way. So the dynamical system goes to an attractor. But that's not necessarily the case, right? It's still as before we saw that requires kind of damping to happen. So if we put them on this kind of frictionless surface by putting a bunch of little uh beads under them so they roll around on top of them uh and we drive the arms in this structured way they just move around randomly and chaotically. So it's actually kind of not obvious and it doesn't always happen that this structured emerging behavior uh is found.

Um and just uh for something interesting on in this um actually these different coordinated dances have functional roles. So as a swarm they can rotate the ring that they're in for example in a particular dance right and so for the same drive for the same external uh driving pattern like this one uh the different attractors that they find themselves in can have different collective behaviors. So one can rotate clockwise another one so the arms are here in both cases are moved in the exact same way but this one's now rotating counterclockwise and another pattern is locomoting right so you could see that these are rotating but they're not moving anywhere and this one's actually driving. So actually by tuning them between these attractors we can get the swarm to do uh many kind of to control it to do different complex uh composite tasks.

Um okay so here we're again talking about patterns as relative to the environment. So let's illustrate that.

Uh first of all just to show you a little more intuitively what rattling is. So if I start here uh with five nearby initial conditions in a high rattling configuration uh so this is this like local exponent. You can see that these five initial conditions sort of spread out fairly quickly and and become all over the place. On the other hand, if I start in a low rattling configuration here, um you see that they sort of stay together tycoon. So that's kind of intuitively what we mean by rattling in this case. And so this is again for this drive. And from that we get a certain steady state distribution in the configuration that based on the system. Don't worry about what the three-dimensional kind of plot here is.

it's some representation of the configuration of the swarm. Uh the point is that there's a certain kind of fine-tuned steady state distribution with only a few configurations selected uh after a certain period of time. Now if I change the drive and instead of driving it with this pattern I drive it with this pattern drive A I get a different sort of set distribution for drive B I get yet another one. Right? Um this theory of le straddling actually has one of the predictions is it shows that we can combine drives. For example, if I switch randomly between drive A and B, I would expect that the steady state probability distribution from this sort of environment will be the intersection of these two. So only the configurations that are stable under both A and B will be stable under this A lot. And this is a quantitative prediction that we've tested. Um and so this gives an opportunity to control this robot form using this theory in a way that traditional control theory does not allow because of specifics of this uh system.

And uh what this shows is that basically we can choose which configurations are stable in the steady state by designing the drive specifically. So that really illustrates that the emergent pattern is not an inherent pattern but it's really a pattern of interaction of matching system and drive. So this uh gets us through the second part of kind of emergent plagism, right? And um to get into the third part, this is going to be a work in progress that I think is very exciting. Uh but um is uh sort of in creation. So um yeah, if you have ideas or thoughts, please reach out. We're open to collaborating on this uh as we're developing it. Um basically um here we want to talk about how low rattling seems very parallel to uh active inference and predictive coding sort of methods uh free energy principle. Um but uh unlike those it actually explains why and when this might happen rather than uh how it should happen. So it's sort of a descriptive rather than a normative perspective. And to see that let's first see how low rattling can really uh seem more clearly like learning and adaptation. Perhaps you already saw it a little bit in lost. So, so I'll go through a series of different drives.

So, uh here this is the first drive where uh each uh smartle is moving its arms around completely random. Right?

So, this is the drive pattern. This is here it's running in video and uh the uh we'll quantify the amount of predictive information in each drive and then we'll plot the steady state for each drive.

Right? So, here you can see that the steady state isn't very strongly selected. It's really like u pretty uniformly distributed over all configurations. Um and yeah, so if there's nothing to predict in the drive, there's nothing to adapt to. Uh now we have each of the smartles move its arms around randomly, but all three of them are synchronized together. Right? So here we see the three patterns are the same even though it's random. So now there's a bit of predictive information.

I won't go through how I get these numbers, but um and you can see that it gives a little bit more concentration of which configurations are selected in the steady state. Right? If I then have this very structured drive uh that we looked at earlier uh even more predictive information in it uh and even more fine-tuned configurations being selected uh and so on and now an even more complex drive with with more structure in it uh and even fewer configurations get chosen. So um if we plot the evolution of these steady state distributions of of these probability distributions starting from some uniform cloud of initial conditions uh under these four drives over time uh we see that the fine-tuning kind of increases over time. So this is the entropy of the distribution right uh and the entropy sort of drops as it acquires more and more information drives. So there's really this sense of the drive information imprinting on the system structure over time or the system adapting to the information in its environment and learning from it. Right?

We see that self-organization is only possible when the drive is predictable.

Uh and it really seems to have this learning behavior. Now how do we make this actually concrete and rigorous? So to do that um we look at this amazing work by u these guys verb interpreting dynamic systems as basian reasoners uh and uh basically this is going to be a very kind of simple version of what they did which is more general but basically we can think of uh any dynamical system configuration as encoding a certain belief about the environment right which then means that an external force can be treated as an observation about the environment right and system dynamics due to this force uh perhaps can be thought of as a Beijian update on the environment, right? And so this is kind of the key step that seems like a bit of a leap of faith. And in order to be able to say this and to encode all this, we have this kind of key requirement that we need to find an interpretation map that really maps these configurations to uh probabilities over external world states in such a way that it satisfies this consistency condition. Basically that this diagram commutes, right? that you can either do the dynamics first and then do the interpretation map and get the posterior or you can do the interpretation map first get the prior and then do the Beijian update to get that same posterior. Right? So if going other ways is the same then um we have a consistent uh we can say that the physical dynamics are doing basian reasoning. Now the exciting thing about this [clears throat] is that um the trivial agnostic interpretation map always satisfies this consistent condition.

uh the trivial one meaning that uh no matter what configuration you're in you are basically saying that I don't know anything about the world right so you have a uniform distribution over world states here in the beliefs uh and that will always be uh following correctly the Beijian update which you know is completely useless and boring but it does mean that uh the challenge isn't to just find some interpretation magical interpretation map but the challenge is just to find an interesting one that's actually fine grained and has a lot of kind detailed information about the world, right? So it means that every single dynamical system, no matter how dumb, can be viewed as a basian reasoner, right? And it's not that there's some qualitative distinction between a, you know, a brain as seen as a physical dynamical system and just a pendulum. Uh, but it's that one system can have a more nuanced understanding of the world than the other. But all of them can be said to have some understanding of the world.

So that puts them on a continuum which creates the sort of promising situation where um the rattling systems we're talking about perhaps you know intuitively we see that they are carrying some information about the world. So perhaps we can find that now.

So here we would then see that the low rattling selection because low rattling corresponds to configurations that wobble very little in response to the drive that would be configurations with basically low beijing enterprise under this mapping right and low rattling selection therefore means that physical dynamics naturally realize active inference. So while free energy principle is kind of a normative theory.

It says what should happen for uh beings or organisms to be stable under an environment. Uh this result is descriptive. It says what does happen in dynamical systems that are not biological that are not complicated or smart at all that are really rudimentary. So this seems like a really promising direction for this origins of life. You know where does intentional or agentic or learning behavior come from when we don't have biological systems.

This seems to say that it's actually quite general as long as we look at it through the right lens of this interpretation map. So we can think of this sort of as a cycle where we have the physical dynamics that get mapped through the interpretation map to some set of concepts or beliefs or patterns about the world uh which then uh help us through sort of this active inference and low rattling uh selection to find the dynamics uh and live in a world such that the dynamics are uh uh have low least surprise or least rattling. Right?

uh and this gives this kind of two-way perspective on this participatory platonism, right? Where on one hand the platonic patterns that are selected that matter are the ones that are predictive for the physical world, the ones that allow you to minimize surprise. Uh and so that gives the physical world put selection pressure on the platonic forms and at the same time the interpretation map uh determines which aspects of the dynamical system we are trying to predict which which aspects are considered relevant and interesting.

Right? So this is how the platonic pattern also puts pressure on what it is we are paying attention to among the physical degrees of freedom because we're never paying attention to all of them, right? Uh and so this creates this sort of chicken and egg cycle where neither the physical nor the platonic is primary, right? And so that kind of illustrates this participatory perspective in my line. So so this take us kind of to the end of the presentation where we went through these three perspectives, these three sort of example perspectives, right? where we had this uh pattern that was encoded in simple equations of Hamiltonian system dynamics that then influenced which ordered behaviors uh emerged when we added damping and noise coupling. Uh and so that was sort of this transcendental platonism where uh some abstract mathematical principles have influence on the physical world. Uh the second perspective was this emergent where the patterns and platonic sort of structures that arise uh were fundamentally emergent from the interaction of the environment and the system and they could not be said to be prior to that dynamics. Basically before the dynamics was before that interaction happened they they were not defined right.

uh and uh finally really feeding that into it to say that okay well we are choosing this arbitrary interpretation map that connects the physical and the abstract right and based on that it matters you know that is what dictates which aspects of the physical we're paying attention to but at the same time uh since we want uh such platonic patterns that are actually predictive and useful in the physical world that puts selection pressure on that so that creates this uh feedback loop and non-dual sort of perspective where neither the material nor the ideal are primary.

And so with that uh I thank my collaborators Jeremy England, my old adviser from MIT uh Robert Marceland and Matthew Barbier for this u we're creating this community together this research community and my uh previous collaborators in the rattling work. Um please reach out with any questions or thoughts or suggestions. I'm always happy and looking for collaborators on any of this. Follow me on my blog here.

Uh we made a website to introduce people to the rattling theory a little more gently than the paper. So rattling.org uh is our sort of tutorial. And uh this community, this research community we're creating for uh merger of complexity science and its application to contemplative studies and big philosophical questions including platonism and other philosophical movements. uh how we can actually solve these through rigorous concrete examples and dynamical systems with applications to you know robots worms or other technologies. So uh this is our website it's just a longer URL also I put a a QR code here. Thanks so much and uh I hope uh you enjoyed the presentation and learned